
Africa
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Africa (disambiguation).

Africa

Area	30,221,532 km2 (11,668,599 sq mi)
Population	1,032,532,974[1] (2011, 2nd)
Pop. density	30.51/km2 (about 80/sq mi)
Demonym	African
Countries	54 (list of countries)
Dependencies	
List
Mayotte
Runion
Canary Islands
Ceuta
Madeira Islands
Melilla
Saint Helena
Languages	Languages of Africa
Time Zones	UTC-1 to UTC+4
Largest cities	List of metropolitan areas in Africa
List of cities in Africa


Map of Africa
Africa is the world's second-largest and second-most-populous continent. At about 30.2 million km (11.7 million sq mi) including adjacent islands, it covers six percent of the Earth's total surface area and 20.4 percent of the total land area.[2] With 1.0 billion people (as of 2009, see table), it accounts for about 15% of the world's human population. The continent is surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, both the Suez Canal and the Red Sea along the Sinai Peninsula to the northeast, the Indian Ocean to the southeast, and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. The continent includes Madagascar and various archipelagoes. It has 54 fully recognized sovereign states ("countries"), 9 territories and two de facto independent states with limited or no recognition.[3]
Africa, particularly central Eastern Africa, is widely accepted as the origin of humans and the Hominidae clade (great apes), as evidenced by the discovery of the earliest hominids and their ancestors, as well as later ones that have been dated to around seven million years ago  including Sahelanthropus tchadensis, Australopithecus africanus, A. afarensis, Homo erectus, H. habilis and H. ergaster  with the earliest Homo sapiens (modern human) found in Ethiopia being dated to circa 200,000 years ago.[4] Africa straddles the equator and encompasses numerous climate areas; it is the only continent to stretch from the northern temperate to southern temperate zones.[5]
Contents
1 Etymology
2 History
2.1 Prehistory
2.2 Early civilizations
2.3 9th to 18th centuries
2.4 Height of slave trade
2.5 Colonialism and the "Scramble for Africa"
2.6 Berlin Conference
2.7 Independence struggles
2.8 Post-colonial Africa
3 Geography
3.1 Climate
3.2 Fauna
3.3 Ecology
4 Biodiversity
5 Politics
5.1 The African Union
6 Economy
7 Demographics
8 Languages
9 Culture
9.1 Visual art and architecture
9.2 Music and dance
9.3 Sports
10 Religion
11 Territories and regions
12 See also
13 References
14 Further reading
15 External links
Etymology

Afri was a Latin name used to refer to the Carthaginians, who dwelt in North Africa in modern-day Tunisia. This name seems to have originally referred to a native Libyan tribe; however, see Terence#Biography for discussion. The name is usually connected with Phoenician afar, "dust", but a 1981 hypothesis[6] has asserted that it stems from the Berber ifri (plural ifran) "cave", in reference to cave dwellers.[7] The same word[7] may be found in the name of the Banu Ifran from Algeria and Tripolitania, a Berber tribe originally from Yafran (also known as Ifrane) in northwestern Libya.[8]
Under Roman rule, Carthage became the capital of Africa Province, which also included the coastal part of modern Libya.[9] The Latin suffix "-ica" can sometimes be used to denote a land (e.g., in Celtica from Celtae, as used by Julius Caesar). The later Muslim kingdom of Ifriqiya, modern-day Tunisia, also preserved a form of the name.
According to the ancient Romans, Africa lay to the west of Egypt, while "Asia" was used to refer to Anatolia and lands to the east. A definite line was drawn between the two continents by the geographer Ptolemy (85165 AD), indicating Alexandria along the Prime Meridian and making the isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea the boundary between Asia and Africa. As Europeans came to understand the real extent of the continent, the idea of Africa expanded with their knowledge.
Other etymological hypotheses have been postulated for the ancient name "Africa":
The 1st-century Jewish historian Flavius Josephus (Ant. 1.15) asserted that it was named for Epher, grandson of Abraham according to Gen. 25:4, whose descendants, he claimed, had invaded Libya.
Isidore of Seville in Etymologiae XIV.5.2. suggests the Latin aprica "sunny".
Leo Africanus (14881554) proposed the Greek aphrike (), "without cold". Africanus suggested that the Greek phrike (, "cold and horror"), combined with the privative prefix "a-", indicated a land free of cold and horror.[10]
Another theory is that the word aphrik comes from aphrs, 'foam' and Aphrik, 'land of foam', meaning the land of the big waves (like Attica, from the word akt, Aktik meaning land of the coasts).[citation needed]
Massey, in 1881, states that Africa is derived from the Egyptian af-rui-ka, "to turn toward the opening of the Ka." The Ka is the energetic double of every person and "opening of the Ka" refers to a womb or birthplace. Africa would be, for the Egyptians, "the birthplace."[11]
Yet another hypothesis was proposed by Michle Fruyt in Revue de Philologie 50, 1976: 221238, linking the Latin word with africus "south wind", which would be of Umbrian origin and mean originally "rainy wind".
The Irish female name Aifric is sometimes anglicised as Africa, but the given name is unrelated to the toponym.
History

Main article: History of Africa
Further information: History of North Africa, History of West Africa, History of Central Africa, History of East Africa, and History of Southern Africa
Prehistory
Main article: Recent African origin of modern humans


Lucy, an Australopithecus afarensis skeleton discovered on November 24, 1974, in the Awash Valley of Ethiopia's Afar Depression
Africa is considered by most paleoanthropologists to be the oldest inhabited territory on Earth, with the human species originating from the continent.[12][13] During the middle of the 20th century, anthropologists discovered many fossils and evidence of human occupation perhaps as early as 7 million years ago. Fossil remains of several species of early apelike humans thought to have evolved into modern man, such as Australopithecus afarensis (radiometrically dated to approximately 3.93.0 million years BC),[14] Paranthropus boisei (c. 2.31.4 million years BC)[15] and Homo ergaster (c. 1.9 million600,000 years BC) have been discovered.[2]
Throughout humanity's prehistory, Africa (like all other continents) had no nation states, and was instead inhabited by groups of hunter-gatherers such as the Khoi and San.[16][17][18]
At the end of the Ice Ages, estimated to have been around 10,500 BC, the Sahara had again become a green fertile valley, and its African populations returned from the interior and coastal highlands in Sub-Saharan Africa.[citation needed] However, the warming and drying climate meant that by 5000 BC, the Sahara region was becoming increasingly dry and hostile. The population trekked out of the Sahara region towards the Nile Valley below the Second Cataract where they made permanent or semi-permanent settlements. A major climatic recession occurred, lessening the heavy and persistent rains in Central and Eastern Africa. Since this time, dry conditions have prevailed in Eastern Africa and, increasingly during the last 200 years, in Ethiopia.
The domestication of cattle in Africa preceded agriculture and seems to have existed alongside hunter-gatherer cultures. It is speculated that by 6000 BC, cattle were already domesticated in North Africa.[19] In the Sahara-Nile complex, people domesticated many animals, including the donkey and a small screw-horned goat which was common from Algeria to Nubia. In the year 4000 BC, the climate of the Sahara started to become drier at an exceedingly fast pace.[20] This climate change caused lakes and rivers to shrink significantly and caused increasing desertification. This, in turn, decreased the amount of land conducive to settlements and helped to cause migrations of farming communities to the more tropical climate of West Africa.[20]
By the first millennium BC, ironworking had been introduced in Northern Africa and quickly spread across the Sahara into the northern parts of sub-Saharan Africa,[21] and by 500 BC, metalworking began to become commonplace in West Africa. Ironworking was fully established by roughly 500 BC in many areas of East and West Africa, although other regions didn't begin ironworking until the early centuries AD. Copper objects from Egypt, North Africa, Nubia and Ethiopia dating from around 500 BC have been excavated in West Africa, suggesting that Trans-Saharan trade networks had been established by this date.[20]
Early civilizations
Main article: Ancient African history


Colossal statues of Ramesses II at Abu Simbel, Egypt, date from around 1400 BC.


The origins and spread of the Bantu languages c. 1000 BC to c. 500 AD.
At about 3300 BC, the historical record opens in Northern Africa with the rise of literacy in the Pharaonic civilisation of Ancient Egypt.[22] One of the world's earliest and longest-lasting civilizations, the Egyptian state continued, with varying levels of influence over other areas, until 343 BC.[23][24] Egyptian influence reached deep into modern-day Libya, north to Crete[25] and Canaan,[citation needed] and south to the kingdoms of Aksum[citation needed] and Nubia.[citation needed]
An independent centre of civilisation with trading links to Phoenicia was established by Phoenicians from Tyre on the north-west African coast at Carthage.[26][27][28]
European exploration of Africa began with Ancient Greeks and Romans. In 332 BC, Alexander the Great was welcomed as a liberator in Persian-occupied Egypt. He founded Alexandria in Egypt, which would become the prosperous capital of the