 
 
 
 
 
 
 animated productions style often characterized by colorful graphics, vibrant characters and fantastic themes.   The intended meaning of the term sometimes varies depending on the context. 

While the earliest known Japanese animation dates to 1917, and many original Japanese animations were produced in the ensuing decades, the characteristic anime style developed in the 1960snotably with the work of Osamu Tezukaand became known outside Japan in the 1980s.

Anime, like manga, has a large audience in Japan and recognition throughout the world. Distributors can release anime via television broadcasts, directly to Original video animation|video, or theatrically, as well as Original net animation|online.
 East and Southeast Asia. Anime is currently popular in many different regions around the world.

== History ==
 
 
  (1944), the first feature-length anime film]]
 filmmakers experimented with the animation techniques also pioneered in France, Germany, the United States, and Russia.    The oldest known anime in existence first screened in 1917  a two-minute clip of a samurai trying to test a new sword on his target, only to suffer defeat.   Early pioneers included Shimokawa Oten, Junichi Kouchi, and Seitar Kitayama.  
 
 cutout not cel animation, although with masterful results.  Other creators, such as Kenz Masaoka and Mitsuyo Seo, nonetheless made great strides in animation technique, especially with increasing help from a government using animation in education and propaganda.  The first talkie anime was Chikara to Onna no Yo no Naka, produced by Masaoka in 1933.       By 1940, numerous anime artists organizations had risen, including the  Shin Mangaha Shudan and Shin Nippon Mangaka. During this time period, anime was extensively used as a channel for government propaganda.  The first feature length animated film was Momotaros Divine Sea Warriors directed by Seo in 1945 with sponsorship by the Imperial Japanese Navy. Official booklet, The Roots of Japanese Anime, DVD, Zakka Films, 2009.
 
 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs profoundly influenced many Japanese animators.  In the 1960s, manga artist and animator Osamu Tezuka adapted and simplified many Disney animation techniques to reduce costs and to limit the number of frames in productions. He intended this as a temporary measure to allow him to produce material on a tight schedule with inexperienced animation staff. 

The 1970s saw a surge of growth in the popularity of manga  many of them later animated. The work of Osamu Tezuka drew particular attention: he has been called a "legend"  and the "god of manga".   mainstream in Japan (although less than manga), and experienced a boom in production. Following a few successful adaptations of anime in overseas markets in the 1980s, anime gained increased acceptance in those markets in the 1990s and even more at the turn of the 21st century.

== Terminology ==
Japanese write the English term "animation" in katakana as  (animshon, pronounced  ); anime is short for this. Many sources claim that anime derives from the French phrase dessin anim,   however this is debated.  Japanese-speakers use both the original and abbreviated forms interchangeably, but the shorter form occurs more commonly.
 mora carries equal stress.) As with a few other Japanese words such as sak, Pokmon, and Kobo Ab, English-language texts sometimes spell anime as anim (as in French), with an acute accent over the final e, to cue the reader to pronounce the letter, not to leave it silent as English orthography might suggest.

=== Word usage ===
In Japan, the term anime does not specify an animations nation of origin or style; instead, it serves as a blanket term to refer to all forms of animation from around the world.   English-language dictionaries define anime as "a Japanese style of motion-picture animation" or as "a style of animation developed in Japan".  

Non-Japanese works that borrow stylization from anime are commonly referred to as "anime-influenced animation" but it is not unusual for a viewer who does not know the country of origin of such material to refer to it as simply "anime". Some works result from co-productions with non-Japanese companies, such as most of the traditionally animated Rankin/Bass works, the Cartoon Network and Production I.G series IGPX or ban Star-Racers; different viewers may or may not consider these anime.

In English, anime, when used as a common  . Anime can also be used as a   is different from the movie The Guyver|Guyver.

=== Synonyms ===
English-speakers occasionally refer to anime as "Japanimation", but this term has fallen into disuse. "Japanimation" saw the most usage during the 1970s and 1980s, but the term "anime" supplanted it in the mid-1990s as the material became more widely known in English-speaking countries.   
In general, the term now only appears in nostalgic contexts.   Since "anime" does not identify the country of origin in Japanese usage, "Japanimation" is used to distinguish Japanese work from that of the rest of the world. 

In Japan, "manga" can refer to both animation and comics.  Among English speakers, "manga" has the stricter meaning of "Japanese comics", in parallel to the usage of "anime" in and outside of Japan.  The term "ani-manga" is used to describe comics produced from animation cels. 

== Visual characteristics ==
 
 Only Yesterday or Jin-Roh take much more realistic approaches, featuring few stylistic exaggerations; Pokmon uses drawings which specifically do not distinguish the nationality of characters.  
 

While different titles and different artists have their own artistic styles, many stylistic elements have become so common that describe them as definitive of anime in general. However, this does not mean that all modern anime share one strict, common art-style. Many anime have a very different art style from what would commonly be called "anime style", yet fans still use the word "anime" to refer to these titles. Generally, the most common form of anime drawings include "exaggerated physical features such as large eyes, big hair and elongated limbs... and dramatically shaped speech bubbles, speed lines and onomatopoeic, exclamatory typography."       

The influences of Japanese calligraphy and Japanese painting also characterize linear qualities of the anime style. The round ink brush traditionally used for writing kanji and for painting, produces a stroke of widely varying thickness.

Anime also tends to borrow many elements from manga, including text in the background and panel layouts. For example, an opening may employ manga panels to tell the story, or to dramatize a point for humorous effect. See for example the anime Kare Kano.

=== Character design ===
 
Basic character designs use techniques implemented in cartoon design.    Among these techniques include the use of reference sketches to ensure character proportionality and multiple angle designs.

John Opplinger, an analyst for AnimeNation, noted that like in any other medium the importance of a recognizable silhouette allowing viewers to instantly recognize the a character. However he stated that although anime series that featured of distinctive and memorable characters from prolific designers contained many examples of not performing well, whereas other series that relied on very narrow variances between characters have been popular. Opplinger stated that although ultimately the majority of the contemporary character designs in anime series evolve to match the tastes of the paying audience, there are occasional shows that feature distinctive character designs. 

==== Proportions ====
Body proportions emulated in anime come from proportions of the human body. The height of the head is considered by the artist as the base unit of proportion. Head heights can vary as long as the remainder of the body remains proportional. Most anime characters are about seven to eight heads tall, and extreme heights are set around nine heads tall.  
 

Variations to proportion can be modified by the artist. Super deformed|Super-deformed characters feature a non-proportionally small body compared to the head. Sometimes specific body parts, like legs, are shortened or elongated for added emphasis. Most super deformed characters are two to four heads tall. Some anime works like Crayon Shin-chan completely disregard these proportions, such that they resemble Western cartoons. For exaggeration, certain body features are increased in proportion.   Comedic effects often utilize these variations.

==== Eye styles ==== Ribbon no Kishi, the first manga specifically targeted at young girls, Tezuka further exaggerated the size of the characters eyes. Indeed, through Ribbon no Kishi, Tezuka set a stylistic template that later shjo artists tended to follow.

Coloring is added to give eyes, particularly to the cornea, some depth. The depth is accomplished by applying variable color shading. Generally, a mixture of a light shade, the tone color, and a dark shade is used.   Cultural anthropologist Matt Thorn argues that Japanese animators and audiences do not perceive such stylized eyes as inherently more or less foreign.  
 

However, not all anime have large eyes. For example, some of the work of Hayao Miyazaki and Toshiro Kawamoto are known for having realistically proportioned eyes, as well as realistic hair colors on their characters.   

==== Facial expressions ====
 

Anime characters may employ a variety of predetermined facial expressions to denote moods and thoughts.  These techniques are often different in form than their counterparts in Western animation, and they include a fixed iconography thats used as shorthand for certain emotions and moods. 
 from nowhere bloody nose around their female love interests (typically to indicate arousal, which is a play on an old wives tale).    Embarrassed or stressed characters either produce a massive Manga iconography|sweat-drop (which has become one of the most widely recognized motifs of conventional anime) or produce a visibly red blush or set of parallel (sometimes squiggly) lines beneath the eyes, especially as a manifestation of repressed romantic feelings. Characters who want to childishly taunt someone may pull an akanbe face (by pulling an eyelid down with a finger to expose the red underside). Characters may also have large "X" eyes to show a knockout, or in some cases, even illness. This is typically used for comedic purposes.  Vacant, non-reflecting eyes can be used to indicate a state of semi-consciousness.

=== Animation technique === cel production and so on still apply. With improvements in computer technology, computer animation increased the efficiency of the whole production process.
 Ghost in the Shell and Princess Mononoke mixed cel animation with computer-generated images. Towards the late 1990s, companies had began shifting towards drawing cels digitally instead of with paint. Fuji Films to boldly announce the halt of cel production for the animation industry prompting a mass scramble to import foreign cels and transfer more of the production line to digital. 
 pose to short films, silhouette and other cutout animation of Nobur fuji,       the stop motion puppet animation of Tadahito Mochinaga, Kihachir Kawamoto    and Tomoyasu Murata  and the computer animation of Satoshi Tomioka  (most famously Usavich).  Sara Pocock, an animator and contributor to Anime News Network, described the majority of "mainstream" anime as being animated using the pose to pose style but using fewer expressive keyframes and more in-between animation.   

Japanese animation studios were pioneers of many limited animation techniques. Ke Jiang, an animator for Disney, told Anime News Network that like everyone in animation, Japanese animators study the techniques of Disney in school, however Japanese anime has its own set of rules to be followed that have developed over time. Unlike Disney animation where the emphasis is on the movement, Anime emphasizes the art quality as limited animation techniques could make up for the lack of time spent on movement. Such techniques were often used not only to meet deadlines but also as artistic devices.    Even in bigger productions, studios often use limited animation techniques, even intentionally at times, to fool the eye into thinking there is more movement than there is.  John Oppliger, when examining the question of animation quality inconsistency from titles, noted a trend in his weekly column for AnimeNation "Ask John" that for titles from larger studios, stating that the "most reliable predictor for animation quality" is the profile of the series itself, and that "shows that are expected to be big hits or shows that are consciously crafted to make a big splash ... typically get unusually exceptional animation quality." He stated that although viewers can expect high quality animation from small studios with a reputation for high quality animation due to their ability to focus all of their resources on a single work, large studios tend to work on several shows and thus prioritize speed over quality. Oppliger stated that anime is one of the rare mediums were putting together an all-star cast usually comes out looking "tremedously impressive." 
 Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya are based on various locations within the suburb of Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan. 

===Camera effects===
Camera angles, camera movement, and lighting play an important role in scenes. Directors often have the discretion of determining viewing angles for scenes, particularly regarding backgrounds. In addition, camera angles show Perspective (graphical)|perspective.    Directors can also choose camera effects within cinematography, such as panning, zooming, facial closeup, and panoramic. 

==Story themes== American westerns.  While animation for children exists, most anime target an older audience. {{cite web
|url= http://www.utexas.edu/features/archive/2004/anime.html |title=An Anime Explosion |publisher=University of Texas-Austin |date=2008-10-09 |accessdate=2011-10-04}} 

As early as Osamu Tezukas Atom Boy (1963), the doll with a soul - from the Japanese old folk belief that a doll loved and cared for can develop a soul - became a recurring motif in Japan. This fuzzy border between the human and the mechanical would supply themes again and again, appearing later also as cybernetic humans beginning with the 8 Man (1963) series and the robot where humans initially controlled robots via radio but later as pilots in their interior as in the giant robot subgenre. These shows presented technology not as inherently good or evil, but instead as a tool that could be used in either way. Gilles Poitras describes this as "appropriate", since the Japanese had seen the rebirth of their own nation through technology after the destruction at the hands of political and military power. 
{{cite book |last=Poitras |first=Gilles |author-link=Gilles Poitras |title=Anime Essentials |publisher=Stone Bridge Press |year=2001 page = 18-19
}} 

In the 1970s, Poitras writes, many series began drawing from great heroes and epic stories. Several works mined the manga writer Leiji Matsumotos tales of heroism, of courage, of humanity, and of suffering set in many a strange world. Narratives in the fantasy and supernatural genre drew especially from Shinto and Buddhist legends and practices - and later from western influences, from sources such as Dungeons and Dragons. 

== Production ==
An anime typically is created when the producer at a company is able to build a marketing opportunity for the show by for example securing an adequate TV broadcasting time slot or opportunities to create supporting merchandise like trading cards. The vast majority of anime is not original but an adaptation of another art form such as Manga, light novels, or video games. Once producer has made the decision to invest in the project and the original creator of the work is on board, the producer pitches to the Production Committee and other potentially interested parties in order to secure funds. Anime production typically involves employing the services of 2,000 people per episode around the world and costs US$100,000-300,000 per episode, so US$24 million for a typical series of 13 episodes. Every couple of weeks