 
 
{{taxobox image = Cannabis sativa Koehler drawing.jpg image_caption = Common hemp status = LC status_system = IUCN3.1 regnum = Plantae unranked_divisio = Angiosperms unranked_classis = Eudicots unranked_ordo = Rosids ordo = Rosales familia = Cannabaceae genus = Cannabis genus_authority = Carolus Linnaeus|L. subdivision_ranks = Species subdivision = Cannabis sativa L.  
Cannabis indica Lam. (putative)  
Cannabis ruderalis Janisch. (putative)
|}} indigenous to medicinal purposes, recreational drug. UN Narcotics psychoactive constituent responsible for the "high" associated with cannabis (drug)|marijuana. Marijuana consists of the dried flowers of Cannabis plants selectively bred to produce high levels of THC and other psychoactive cannabinoids. Various extracts including hashish and hash oil are also produced from the plant. Erowid. 2006.  . Retrieved on 25 February 2007 
  in Guwahati, Assam, India]]

==Etymology==
 
The word cannabis is from  n and Neo-Babylonian qunnabu were used to refer to the plant meaning "a way to produce smoke."   

==Description== flowering herb. leaves are palmately compound serrate leaflets. leaf arrangement and the upper leaf pairs in an alternate arrangement on the main stem of a mature plant.

 The leaves have a peculiar and diagnostic venation pattern that enables persons poorly familiar with the plant to distinguish a Cannabis leaf from unrelated species that have confusingly similar leaves (see illustration). As is common in serrated leaves, each serration has a central vein extending to its tip. However,the serration vein originates from lower down the central vein of the leaflet, typically opposite to the position of, not the first notch down, but the next notch. This means that on its way from the midrib of the leaflet to the point of the serration, the vein serving the tip of the serration passes close by the intervening notch. Sometimes the vein will actually pass tangent to the notch, but often it will pass by at a small distance, and when that happens a spur vein (occasionally a pair of such spur veins) branches off and joins the leaf margin at the deepest point of the notch. This venation pattern varies slightly among varieties, but in general it enables one to tell Cannabis leaves from superficially similar leaves without difficulty and without special equipment. Tiny samples of Cannabis plants also can be identified with precision by microscopic examination of leaf cells and similar features, but that requires special expertise and equipment. Watt, John Mitchell; Breyer-Brandwijk, Maria Gerdina: The Medicinal and Poisonous Plants of Southern and Eastern Africa 2nd ed Pub. E & S Livingstone 1962 

Cannabis normally has  s, and female flowers are borne on  . Retrieved on 23 February 2007  "At a very early period the Chinese recognized the Cannabis plant as dioecious,"  and the (ca. 3rd century BCE)   "male Cannabis" and fu   (or ju  ) "female Cannabis". 

 s at the foot of  ,  with the possible exception of C. sativa subsp. sativa var. spontanea (= C. ruderalis), which is commonly described as "auto-flowering" and may be Photoperiodism|day-neutral.

Cannabis, like many organisms, is   in size, was published in 2011 by a team of Canadian scientists.  The plant is believed to have originated in the mountainous regions northwest of the Himalayas. It is also known as hemp, although this term is often used to refer only to varieties of Cannabis cultivated for non-drug use. Cannabis plants produce a group of chemicals called cannabinoids, which produce mental and physical effects when consumed.

 ), resin (hashish), or various extracts collectively known as hashish oil.  In the early 20th century, it became illegal in most of the world to cultivate or possess Cannabis for sale or personal use.
  Root system side view Root system top view Micrograph sativa (left), indica (right)
 

==Taxonomy==
  gene sequencing strongly suggest that the Cannabaceae sensu stricto arose from within the former Celtidaceae family, and that the two families should be merged to form a single monophyletic family, the Cannabaceae sensu lato. Song, B.-H., Wang, X.-Q., Li, F.-Z., and Hong, D.-Y. 2001.  . Plant Systematics and Evolution 228(1-2): 107-115.  Sytsma, K. J., Morawetz, J., Pires, J. C., Nepokroeff, M., Conti, E., Zjhra, M., Hall, J. C., and Chase, M. W. 2002.  . American Journal of Botany 89(9): 1531–1546. 

Various types of Cannabis have been described, and variously classified as species, subspecies, or Variety (biology)|varieties: Small, Ernest. 1975.  . Bulletin on Narcotics 27(3): 1-20. Retrieved on 23 February 2007 
* plants cultivated for fiber and seed production, described as low-intoxicant, non-drug, or fiber types.
* plants cultivated for drug production, described as high-intoxicant or drug types.
* escaped, hybridised, or wild forms of either of the above types.

Cannabis plants produce a unique family of terpeno-phenolic compounds called cannabinoids, which produce the "high" one experiences from consuming marijuana. There are 483 identifiable chemical constituents known to exist in the cannabis plant,  and at least 85 different cannabinoids have been isolated from the plant.  The two cannabinoids usually produced in greatest abundance are cannabidiol (  production is influenced by environmental factors, the THC/CBD ratio is genetically determined and remains fixed throughout the life of a plant. Etienne P. M. de Meijer, M. Bagatta, A. Carboni, P. Crucitti, V. M. Cristiana Moliterni, P. Ranalli, and G. Mandolino. 2003.   Genetics 163(1): 335-346. Retrieved on 23 February 2007  Non-drug plants produce relatively low levels of THC and high levels of CBD, while drug plants produce high levels of THC and low levels of CBD. When plants of these two chemotypes cross-pollinate, the plants in the first filial (F 1 ) generation have an intermediate chemotype and produce similar amounts of CBD and THC. Female plants of this chemotype may produce enough THC to be utilized for drug production.  Hillig, Karl W. and Paul G. Mahlberg. 2004.  . American Journal of Botany 91(6): 966-975. Retrieved 22 February 2007. 

 
Whether the drug and non-drug, cultivated and wild types of Cannabis constitute a single, highly variable species, or the genus is polytypic with more than one species, has been a subject of debate for well over two centuries. This is a contentious issue because there is no universally accepted definition of a   are not known to occur within Cannabis, and plants from widely divergent sources are interfertile.  However, physical barriers to gene exchange (such as the Himalayan mountain range) might have enabled Cannabis gene pools to diverge before the onset of human intervention, resulting in speciation. Hillig, Karl W. 2005.  . Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution 52(2): 161-180. Retrieved on 23 February 2007  It remains controversial whether sufficient morphological and genetic divergence occurs within the genus as a result of geographical or ecological isolation to justify recognition of more than one species. Small, E. 1975.  . Plant Science Bulletin 21(3): 34-39. Retrieved on 23 February 2007  Emboden, W. A. 1981. The genus Cannabis and the correct use of taxonomic categories. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 13: 15–21.  Schultes, R. E., and A. Hofmann. 1980. Botany and Chemistry of Hallucinogens. C. C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinois, pp. 82–116. ISBN 0-398-03863-5 

===Early classifications===
 

The Cannabis genus was first   published a description of a second species of Cannabis, which he named Cannabis indica Lam. de Lamarck, J.B. 1785. Encyclopédie Méthodique de Botanique, vol. 1, pt. 2. Paris, France, pp. 694–695  Lamarck based his description of the newly named species on plant specimens collected in India. He described C. indica as having poorer fiber quality than C. sativa, but greater utility as an   where Cannabis continued to be the subject of active taxonomic study. The name Cannabis indica was listed in various Pharmacopoeias, and was widely used to designate Cannabis suitable for the manufacture of medicinal preparations. Winek, C. L. 1977. Some historical aspects of marijuana. Clinical Toxicology 10(2): 243-253. 

===20th century===
 
In 1924, Russian botanist D.E. Janichevsky concluded that ruderal Cannabis in central Russia is either a variety of C. sativa or a separate species, and proposed C. sativa L. var. ruderalis Janisch. and Cannabis ruderalis Janisch. as alternative names.  In 1929, renowned plant explorer Nikolai Vavilov assigned wild or feral populations of Cannabis in Afghanistan to C. indica Lam. var. kafiristanica Vav., and ruderal populations in Europe to C. sativa L. var. spontanea Vav.   In 1940, Russian botanists Serebriakova and Sizov proposed a complex classification in which they also recognized C. sativa and C. indica as separate species. Within C. sativa they recognized two subspecies: C. sativa L. subsp. culta Serebr. (consisting of cultivated plants), and C. sativa L. subsp. spontanea (Vav.) Serebr. (consisting of wild or feral plants). Serebriakova and Sizov split the two C. sativa subspecies into 13 varieties, including four distinct groups within subspecies culta. However, they did not divide C. indica into subspecies or varieties.  Serebriakova T. Ya. and I. A. Sizov. 1940. Cannabinaceae Lindl. In: Vavilov N. I. (ed.), Kulturnaya Flora SSSR, vol. 5, Moscow-Leningrad, USSR, pp. 1–53.    This excessive splitting of C. sativa proved too unwieldy, and never gained many adherents.

In the 1970s, the taxonomic classification of Cannabis took on added significance in North America. Laws prohibiting Cannabis in the United States and Canada specifically named products of C. sativa as prohibited materials. Enterprising attorneys for the defense in a few drug busts argued that the seized Cannabis material may not have been C. sativa, and was therefore not prohibited by law. Attorneys on both sides recruited botanists to provide expert testimony. Among those testifying for the prosecution was Dr. Ernest Small, while Richard E. Schultes|Dr. Richard E. Schultes and others testified for the defense. The botanists engaged in heated debate (outside of court), and both camps impugned the others integrity.   The defense attorneys were not often successful in winning their case, because the intent of the law was clear. Watts, G. 2006.  . BMJ 332: 175-176. Retrieved on 23 February 2007 

In 1976, Canadian botanist Ernest Small  . National Research Council Canada. Retrieved on 23 February 2007  and American taxonomist   for traits that enhance fiber or seed production, whereas C. sativa subsp. indica was primarily selected for drug production. Within these two subspecies, Small and Cronquist described C. sativa L. subsp. sativa var. spontanea Vav. as a wild or escaped variety of low-intoxicant Cannabis, and C. sativa subsp. indica var. kafiristanica (Vav.) Small & Cronq. as a wild or escaped variety of the high-intoxicant type. This classification was based on several factors including interfertility, chromosome uniformity, chemotype, and numerical analysis of phenotypic characters.   Small, E., P. Y. Jui, and L. P. Lefkovitch. 1976. A numerical taxonomic analysis of Cannabis with special reference to species delimitation. Systematic Botany 1(1): 67-84. 
 strains from wide-leafed "indica" drug strains.  . 1 Jan 2005. NORML, New Zealand. Retrieved on 19 February 2007 

===Continuing research===
  throughout the studied accessions, and provide further confirmation that the genus comprises a single species, although theirs was not a systematic study per se.

Karl W. Hillig, a  , conducted a systematic investigation of genetic, morphological, and   content of the essential oil of Cannabis revealed that several wide-leaflet drug strains in the collection had relatively high levels of certain sesquiterpene alcohols, including guaiol and isomers of eudesmol, that set them apart from the other putative taxa. Hillig, Karl W. 2004.  . Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 32: 875-891. Retrieved on 23 February 2007  Hillig concluded that the patterns of genetic, morphological, and chemotaxonomic variation support recognition of C. sativa and C. indica as separate species. He also concluded there is little support to treat C. ruderalis as a separate species from C. sativa at this time, but more research on wild and weedy populations is needed because they were underrepresented in their collection.

In September 2005, New Scientist reported that researchers at the Canberra Institute of Technology had identified a new type of Cannabis based on analysis of mitochondrial and chloroplast DNA. 2005.  . New Scientist 2517: 12. Retrieved on 24 February 2007  The New Scientist story, which was picked up by many news agencies and web sites, indicated that the research was to be published in the journal Forensic Science International. Gilmore, S., R. Peakall, and J. Robertson. 2007.  . Forensic Science International 172(2-3): 179-190. Retrieved on 29 December 2008  USDA, ARS, National Genetic Resources Program.  , National Germplasm Resources Laboratory, Beltsville, Maryland. Retrieved on 23 February 2007  Barlow, Snow. 2006.  . Multilingual Multiscript Plant Name Database. The University of Melbourne. Retrieved on 23 February 2007   . Retrieved on 23 February 2007   . Universal Taxonomic Services. Retrieved on 23 February 2007 -->

===Popular usage=== native range, aroma, and subjective psychoactive characteristics. Sativa is the most widespread variety, which is usually tall, laxly branched, and found in warm lowland regions. Indica designates shorter, bushier plants adapted to cooler climates and highland environments. Ruderalis is the informal name for the short plants that grow wild in Europe and central Asia.
 phenotypic characteristics of cultivars by categorizing them as "pure indica," "mostly indica," "indica/sativa," "mostly sativa", or "pure sativa."

One of the most popular and potent sativas in Africa is Malawi Gold, locally known as chamba. It is internationally known for its potency and its flavor.

==Reproduction==

===Breeding systems===
 
Cannabis is predominantly dioecious,  Ainsworth, C. 2000.  . Annals of Botany 86(2): 211-221. Retrieved on 24 February 2007  although many monoecious varieties have been described. de Meijer, E. P. M. 1999. Cannabis germplasm resources. In: Ranalli P. (ed.). Advances in Hemp Research, Haworth Press, Binghamton, NY, pp. 131–151. ISBN 1-56022-872-5  Subdioecy (the occurrence of monoecious individuals and dioecious individuals within the same population) is widespread.    Schumann, E., A. Peil, and W. E. Weber. 1999.  . Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution 46(4): 399-407. Retrieved on 24 February 2007  Ranalli, P. 2004. Current status and future scenarios of hemp breeding. Euphytica 140(1): 121-131.  Many populations have been described as sexually labile.  Hirata, K. 1924. Sex reversal in hemp. Journal of the Society of Agriculture and Forestry 16: 145-168.  Schaffner, J. H. 1931. The fluctuation curve of sex reversal in staminate hemp plants induced by photoperiodicity. American Journal of Botany 18(6): 424-430. 

 .]]
 
As a result of intensive selection in cultivation, Cannabis exhibits many sexual phenotypes that can be described in terms of the ratio of female to male flowers occurring in the individual, or typical in the cultivar. Truta, E., E. Gille, E. Toth, and M. Maniu. 2002.  . Journal of Applied Genetics 43(4): 451-462. Retrieved on 24 February 2007  Dioecious varieties are preferred for drug production, where typically the female flowers are used. Dioecious varieties are also preferred for textile fiber production, whereas monoecious varieties are preferred for pulp and paper production. It has been suggested that the presence of monoecy can be used to differentiate licit crops of monoecious hemp from illicit drug crops.  However, sativa strains often produce monoecious individuals, probably as a result of inbreeding.

===Mechanisms of sex determination=== sex determination among the dioecious plants.  Many models have been proposed to explain sex determination in Cannabis.

Based on studies of sex reversal in   was first described in Drosophila spp in 1925. Bridges, C. B. 1925. Sex in relation to chromosomes and genes. American Naturalist 59: 127-137.  Soon thereafter, Schaffner disputed Hiratas interpretation, Schaffner, J. H. 1929. Heredity and sex. Ohio Journal of Science 29 (1): 289-300.  and published results from his own studies of sex reversal in hemp, concluding that an X:A system was in use and that furthermore sex was strongly influenced by environmental conditions. 

Since then, many different types of sex determination systems have been discovered, particularly in plants.  Dioecy is relatively uncommon in the plant kingdom, and a very low percentage of dioecious plant species have been determined to use the XY system. In most cases where the XY system is found it is believed to have evolved recently and independently. Negrutiu, I., B. Vyskot, N. Barbacar, S. Georgiev, and F. Moneger. 2001.  . Plant Physiology 127 (4): 418-424. 

Since the 1920s, a number of sex determination models have been proposed for Cannabis. Ainsworth describes sex determination in the genus as using "an X/autosome dosage type". 

 
 

The question of whether heteromorphic sex chromosomes are indeed present is most conveniently answered if such chromosomes were clearly visible in a   is slightly larger than the X, but difficult to differentiate cytologically. Peil, A., H. Flachowsky, E. Schumann, and W. E. Weber. 2003. Sex linkage|Sex-linked AFLP markers indicate a pseudoautosomal region in hemp (Cannabis sativa L.). Theoretical and Applied Genetics 107 (1): 102-109. 

More recently, Sakamoto and various co-authors Sakamoto, K., K. Shimomura, Y. Komeda, H. Kamada, and S. Satoh. 1995.   Plant & Cell Physiology 36(8): 1549–1554. Retrieved on 25 February 2007  Sakamoto, K., T. Abe, T. Matsuyama, S. Yoshida, N. Ohmido, K. Fukui, and S. Satoh. 2005.   Genome 48(5): 931-936. Retrieved on 25 February 2007  have used RAPD to isolate several genetic marker sequences that they name Male-Associated DNA in Cannabis (MADC), and which they interpret as indirect evidence of a male chromosome. Several other research groups have reported identification of male-associated markers using RAPD and Amplified fragment length polymorphism|AFLP. Meijer, Etienne P. M. de, M. Bagatta, A. Carboni, P. Crucitti, V. M. Cristiana Moliterni, P. Ranalli, and G. Mandolino. 2003.   Genetics 163(1): 335-346. Retrieved on 23 February 2007  Mandolino, Giuseppe and Paolo Ranalli. 2002.  . Journal of Industrial Hemp 7(1): 7-23. Retrieved on 23 February 2007  Törjék, O., N. Bucherna, E. Kiss, H. Homoki, Z. Finta-Korpelová, I. Bócsa, I. Nagy, and L. E. Heszky. 2002. Novel male specific molecular markers (MADC5, MADC6) for sex identification in hemp. Euphytica 127: 209-218.  Ainsworth commented on these findings, stating, "It is not surprising that male-associated markers are relatively abundant. In dioecious plants where sex chromosomes have not been identified, markers for maleness indicate either the presence of sex chromosomes which have not been distinguished by cytological methods or that the marker is tightly linked to a gene involved in sex determination.  " 
 DNA polymorphisms by genotyping has been developed. Journal of Industrial Hemp 2003 Vol 8 issue 1 page 5-9, Female-Associated DNA Polymorphisms of Hemp (Cannabis sativa L.), Hong Shao, Shu-Juan Song, Robert C. Clarke 

==Industrial and personal uses==
Cannabis is used for a wide variety of purposes.

===Hemp===
 
 
 
The term Hemp is used to name the durable soft fiber from the Cannabis Plant stem (stalk). Cannabis sativa cultivars are used for fibers due to their long stems; Sativa varieties may grow more than six metres tall. However, hemp can refer to any industrial or foodstuff product that is not intended for use as a drug. Many countries regulate limits for psychoactive compound (THC) concentrations in products labeled as hemp. 
 construction material and textiles in general, to clothing. Hemp is stronger and longer-lasting than cotton. It also is a useful source of foodstuffs (help milk, hemp seed, hemp oil) and biofuels. Hemp has been used by many civilizations, from China to Europe (and later North America) during the last 12,000 years.   In modern times novel applications and improvements have been explored with modest commercial success. {{cite journal |
title=Hemp Pulp and Paper Production |
author=Van Roekel, Gerjan J. |
journal=Journal of the International Hemp Association |
year=1994 |
location=Wageningen, The Netherlands |
url=http://www.druglibrary.org/olsen/hemp/IHA/iha01105.html}}    

=== Psychoactive drug ===
 
 
 

Cannabis is a popular recreational drug around the world, only behind ethanol|alcohol, caffeine and tobacco. In the United States alone, it is believed that over 100 million Americans have tried Cannabis, with 25 million Americans having used it within the past year. 

The psychoactive effects of Cannabis are known to have a biphasic nature. Primary psychoactive effects include a state of relaxation, and to a lesser degree, euphoria from its main psychoactive compound, tetrahydrocannabinol. Secondary psychoactive effects, such as a facility for philosophical thinking, introspection and metacognition have been reported amongst cases of anxiety and paranoia.    Finally, the tertiary psychoactive effects of the drug cannabis, can include an increase in heart rate and hunger, believed to be caused by 11-Hydroxy-THC|11-OH-THC, a psychoactive metabolite of THC produced in the liver.
 smoking pipe, bong or vaporizer (cannabis)|vaporizer.  However, if a large amount is taken orally the effects may last much longer. After 24 hours to a few days, minuscule psychoactive effects may be felt, depending on dosage, frequency and tolerance to the drug.

  in Amsterdam.]]
 forms of adulterants when left unregulated.

The plant Cannabis sativa is known to cause more of a "high" by stimulating hunger and by producing a rather more comedic, or energetic feeling. Conversely, the Cannabis indica plant is known to cause more of a "stoned" or meditative feeling, possibly because of a higher CBD to THC ratio. 

Cannabidiol (CBD), which has no psychotropic effects by itself    (although sometimes showing a small stimulant effect, similar to caffeine),  attenuates, or reduces  the higher anxiety levels caused by THC alone.   
 dependence compared withdrawal symptoms such as irritability and insomnia,  and evidence could suggest that if a user experiences stress, the likeliness of getting a panic attack increases because of an increase of THC metabolites.   However, Cannabis withdrawal symptoms are typically mild and are never life-threatening.   
 

===Medical use===
 
 
A synthetic form of the main psychoactive cannabinoid in Cannabis, Δ 9 -tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), is used as a treatment for a wide range of medical conditions.   

In the United States, although the  s. 
 autoimmune disease, cancer, neuroprotection, fever, and disorders of blood pressure.   

Clinical trials conducted by the American Marijuana Policy Project, have shown the efficacy of cannabis as a treatment for cancer and AIDS patients, who often suffer from clinical depression, and from nausea and resulting weight loss due to chemotherapy and other aggressive treatments.  A synthetic version of the cannabinoid THC named dronabinol has been shown to relieve symptoms of anorexia and reduce agitation in elderly Alzheimers patients.  Dronabinol has been approved for use with anorexia in patients with HIV/AIDS and chemotherapy-related nausea. This drug, while demonstrating the effectiveness of Cannabis at combating several disorders, is more expensive and less available than whole cannabis and has not been shown to be effective or safe.   

Glaucoma, a condition of increased pressure within the eyeball causing gradual loss of sight, can be treated with medical marijuana to decrease this intraocular pressure. There has been debate for 25 years on the subject. Some studies have shown a reduction of IOP in glaucoma patients who smoke cannabis,  but the effects are generally short-lived. There exists some concern over its use since it can also decrease blood flow to the optic nerve. Marijuana lowers IOP by acting on a cannabinoid receptor on the ciliary body called the CB receptor.  Although Cannabis may 