
Caribbean
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Carribean)
"West Indies" and "West Indian" redirect here. For other uses, see West India, and West Indies (disambiguation).
This article is about the group of islands. For the body of water surrounding them, see Caribbean Sea. For other uses, see Caribbean (disambiguation).
Caribbean

Area	2,754,000 km2 (1,063,000 sq mi)
Land area	239,681 km2 (92,541 sq mi)
Population (2009)	39,169,962[1]
Density	151.5 /km2 (392 /sq mi)
Ethnic groups	Afro-Caribbean, European, Indo-Caribbean, Chinese Caribbean,[2] Amerindians (Arawak, Caribs, Tanos)
Demonym	West Indian, Caribbean person, Caribbean
Languages	Spanish, English, French, Dutch, others
Government	13 sovereign states
17 dependent territories
Largest cities	Santo Domingo
Havana
Santiago de los Caballeros
Port-au-Prince
Kingston
Santiago de Cuba
San Juan
Holgun
Port of Spain
Internet TLD	Multiple
Calling code	Multiple
Time zone	UTC-5 to UTC-4
The Caribbean (/krbin/ or /krbin/; Spanish: Caribe; Dutch:  Caraben (helpinfo); French: Carabe or more commonly Antilles) is a region that consists of the Caribbean Sea, its islands (some surrounded by the Caribbean Sea and some bordering both the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean), and the surrounding coasts. The region is southeast of the Gulf of Mexico and the North American mainland, east of Central America, and north of South America.
Situated largely on the Caribbean Plate, the region comprises more than 700 islands, islets, reefs, and cays. (See the list.) These islands generally form island arcs that delineate the eastern and northern edges of the Caribbean Sea.[3] The Caribbean islands, consisting of the Greater Antilles on the north and the Lesser Antilles on the south and east (including the Leeward Antilles), are part of the somewhat larger West Indies grouping, which also includes the Lucayan Archipelago (comprising the Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands) north of the Greater Antilles and Caribbean Sea. In a wider sense, the mainland countries of Belize and Guyana  historically and culturally part of the British West Indies  may be included.
Geopolitically, the Caribbean islands are usually regarded as a subregion of North America[4][5][6][7][8] and are organized into 30 territories including sovereign states, overseas departments, and dependencies. From January 3, 1958, to May 31, 1962, there was a short-lived country called the Federation of the West Indies composed of ten English-speaking Caribbean territories, all of which were then UK dependencies. The West Indies cricket team continues to represent many of those nations.
Contents
1 Etymology and pronunciation
2 Definition
3 Geography, geology, and climate
3.1 Island groups
3.2 Historical groupings
3.3 Modern day island territories
3.4 Continental countries with Caribbean coastlines and islands
4 Biodiversity
4.1 Plants and animals of the Caribbean
5 Demographics
5.1 Indigenous groups
5.2 Language
5.3 Religion
6 Politics
6.1 Regionalism
6.1.1 United States effects on regionalism
6.1.2 European Union effects on regionalism
6.1.3 Venezuela's effects on regionalism
7 Regional institutions
8 Cuisine
8.1 Favorite or national dishes
9 See also
10 References
11 Bibliography
12 Further reading
13 External links
Etymology and pronunciation [edit]

The region takes its name from that of the Carib, an ethnic group present in the Lesser Antilles and parts of adjacent South America at the time of the Spanish conquest.[9]
The two most prevalent pronunciations of "Caribbean" are kair--bee-n, with the primary accent on the third syllable, and k-rib-ee-n, with the accent on the second.[10] The former pronunciation is the older of the two, although the stressed-second-syllable variant has been established for over seventy-five years.[11] It has been suggested that speakers of British English prefer kair--bee-n while North American speakers more typically use k-rib-ee-n,[12] although not all sources agree.[13] Usage is split within Caribbean English itself.[14]
Definition [edit]



Map of the Caribbean
The word "Caribbean" has multiple uses. Its principal ones are geographical and political. The Caribbean can also be expanded to include territories with strong cultural and historical connections to slavery, European colonisation, and the plantation system.
The United Nations geoscheme for the Americas accords the Caribbean as a distinct region within The Americas.
Physiographically, the Caribbean region is mainly a chain of islands surrounding the Caribbean Sea. To the north, the region is bordered by the Gulf of Mexico, the Straits of Florida, and the Northern Atlantic Ocean, which lies to the east and northeast. To the south, lies the coastline of the continent of South America
Politically, the "Caribbean" may be centred on socio-economic groupings found in the region. For example, the block known as the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) contains the Co-operative Republic of Guyana, the Republic of Suriname in South America, and Belize in Central America as full members. Bermuda and the Turks and Caicos Islands, which are in the Atlantic Ocean are associate members of the Caribbean Communityas is the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, which is a full member of the Caribbean Community.
Alternatively, the organisation called the Association of Caribbean States (ACS) consists of almost every nation in the surrounding regions that lie on the Caribbean, plus El Salvador, which lies solely on the Pacific Ocean. According to the ACS, the total population of its member states is 227 million people.[15]
Geography, geology, and climate [edit]



  The Caribbean Plate
The geography and climate in the Caribbean region varies: Some islands in the region have relatively flat terrain of non-volcanic origin. These islands include Aruba (possessing only minor volcanic features), Barbados, Bonaire, the Cayman Islands, Saint Croix, The Bahamas, and Antigua. Others possess rugged towering mountain-ranges like the islands of Cuba, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico, Jamaica, Dominica, Montserrat, Saba, Saint Kitts, Saint Lucia, Saint Thomas, Saint John, Tortola, Grenada, Saint Vincent, Guadeloupe, Martinique, and Trinidad & Tobago.
Definitions of the terms Greater Antilles and Lesser Antilles often vary. The Virgin Islands as part of the Puerto Rican bank are sometimes included with the Greater Antilles. The term Lesser Antilles is often used to define an island arc that includes Grenada but excludes Trinidad and Tobago and the Leeward Antilles.
The climate of the area is tropical but rainfall varies with elevation, size, and water currents (cool upwellings keep the ABC islands arid). Warm, moist tradewinds blow consistently from the east creating rainforest/semidesert divisions on mountainous islands. Occasional northwesterlies affect the northern islands in the winter. The region enjoys year-round sunshine, divided into 'dry' and 'wet' seasons, with the last six months of the year being wetter than the first half.
The waters of the Caribbean Sea host large, migratory schools of fish, turtles, and coral reef formations. The Puerto Rico trench, located on the fringe of the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea just to the north of the island of Puerto Rico, is the deepest point in all of the Atlantic Ocean.[16]
Hurricanes that sometimes batter the region usually strike northwards of Grenada and to the west of Barbados. The principal hurricane belt arcs to northwest of the island of Barbados in the Eastern Caribbean.
The region sits in the line of several major shipping routes with the Panama Canal connecting the western Caribbean Sea with the Pacific Ocean.


Puerto Rico's south shore, from the mountains of Jayuya


Puerto Cruz beach in Margarita Island, Venezuela


San Andres (island), Colombia.


Grand Anse beach, St. George's, Grenada


A church cemetery perched in the mountains of Guadeloupe.
Island groups [edit]
Lucayan Archipelago[17]
 Bahamas
 Turks and Caicos Islands (United Kingdom)
Greater Antilles
 Cuba
Hispaniola
 Haiti
 Dominican Republic
 Jamaica
 Cayman Islands (United Kingdom)
 Puerto Rico (U.S. Commonwealth)
Lesser Antilles
Leeward Islands
 U.S. Virgin Islands (United States)
Saint Croix
Saint Thomas
Saint John
Water Island
 British Virgin Islands (United Kingdom)
Tortola
Virgin Gorda
Anegada
Jost Van Dyke
 Anguilla (United Kingdom)
 Antigua and Barbuda
Antigua
Barbuda
Redonda
Saint Martin, politically divided between
 Saint Martin (France)
 Sint Maarten (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
 Saba (BES islands, Netherlands)
 Sint Eustatius (BES islands, Netherlands)
 Saint Barthlemy (French Antilles, France)
 Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Kitts
Nevis
 Montserrat (United Kingdom)
 Guadeloupe (French Antilles, France) including
Les Saintes
Marie-Galante
La Dsirade
Windward Islands
 Dominica
 Martinique (French Antilles, France)
 Saint Lucia
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Saint Vincent
The Grenadines
 Grenada
Grenada
Carriacou and Petite Martinique
 Barbados
 Trinidad and Tobago
Tobago
Trinidad
Leeward Antilles
 Aruba (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
 Curaao (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
 Bonaire (BES islands, Netherlands)
Historical groupings [edit]
Main article: History of the Caribbean


Political evolution of Central America and the Caribbean from 1700 to present


The mostly Spanish-controlled Caribbean in the 16th century
All islands at some point were, and a few still are, colonies of European nations; a few are overseas or dependent territories:
British West Indies/Anglophone Caribbean  Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Bay Islands, Belize, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Montserrat, Saint Croix (briefly), Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago (from 1797) and the Turks and Caicos Islands
Danish West Indies  present-day United States Virgin Islands
Dutch West Indies  Aruba, Bonaire, Curaao, Saba, Sint Eustatius, Sint Maarten, Bay Islands (briefly), Saint Croix (briefly), Suriname, Tobago and Virgin Islands
French West Indies  Anguilla (briefly), Antigua and Barbuda (briefly), Dominica, Dominican Republic (briefly), Grenada, Haiti, Montserrat (briefly), Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sint Eustatius (briefly), Sint Maarten, St. Kitts (briefly), Tobago (briefly), Saint Croix, the current French overseas dpartements of Martinique and Guadeloupe (including Marie-Galante, La Dsirade and Les Saintes), and the current French overseas collectivities of Saint Barthlemy and Saint Martin
Portuguese West Indies  present-day Barbados, known as Os Barbados in the 16th century when the Portuguese claimed the island en route to Brazil. The Portuguese left Barbados abandoned in 1533, nearly a century prior to the British arrival to the island.
Spanish West Indies  Cuba, Hispaniola (present-day Dominican Republic, Haiti (until 1609 to France)), Puerto Rico, Jamaica (until 1655 to Great Britain), the Cayman Islands (until 1670 to Great Britain) Trinidad (until 1797 to Great Britain) and Bay Islands (until 1643 to Great Britain), coastal islands of Central America (minus Belize), and some Caribbean coastal islands of Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela.
Swedish West Indies  present-day French Saint-Barthlemy, Guadeloupe (briefly) and Tobago (briefly).
Courlander West Indies  Tobago (until 1691)
The British West Indies were united by the United Kingdom into a West Indies Federation between 1958 and 1962. The independent countries formerly part of the B.W.I. still have a joint cricket team that competes in Test matches, One Day Internationals and Twenty20 Internationals. The West Indian cricket team includes the South American nation of Guyana, the only former British colony on that continent.
In addition, these countries share the University of the West Indies as a regional entity. The university consists of three main campuses in Jamaica, Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago, a smaller campus in the Bahamas and Resident Tutors in other contributing territories such as Trinidad.
Modern day island territories [edit]


Islands in and near the Caribbean
Main article: List of islands in the Caribbean
See also: Caribbean South America and Caribbean basin
 Anguilla (British overseas territory)
 Antigua and Barbuda (Constitutional monarchy)
 Aruba (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
 Bahamas (Constitutional monarchy)
 Barbados (Constitutional monarchy)
 Bonaire (special municipality of the Netherlands)
 British Virgin Islands (British overseas territory)
 Cayman Islands (British overseas territory)
 Cuba (Republic)
 Curaao (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
 Dominica (Republic)
 Dominican Republic
 Grenada (Constitutional monarchy)
 Guadeloupe (overseas department of France) including
les Saintes
Marie-Galante
la Dsirade
 Haiti (Republic)
 Jamaica (Constitutional monarchy)
 Martinique (overseas department of France)
 Montserrat (British overseas territory)
 Puerto Rico (commonwealth of the United States)
 Saba (special municipality of the Netherlands)
 Saint Barthlemy (overseas collectivity of France)
 Saint Kitts and Nevis (Constitutional monarchy)
 Saint Lucia (Constitutional monarchy)
 Saint Martin (overseas collectivity of France)
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (Constitutional monarchy)
 Sint Eustatius (special municipality of the Netherlands)
 Sint Maarten (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
 Trinidad and Tobago (Republic)
 Turks and Caicos Islands (British overseas territory)
 United States Virgin Islands (territory of the United States)
Continental countries with Caribbean coastlines and islands [edit]
 Belize
Ambergris Caye
Belize City
