 
 
Censorship is the suppression of speech or other public communication which may be considered objectionable, harmful, sensitive, or inconvenient as determined by a government, media outlet, or other controlling body. It can be done by governments and private organizations or by individuals who engage in self-censorship. It occurs in a variety of different contexts including speech, books, music, films, and other arts, the press, radio, television, and the Internet for a variety of reasons including national security, to control obscenity, child pornography, and hate speech, to protect children, to promote or restrict political or religious views, and to prevent slander and libel. It may or may not be legal. Many countries provide strong protections against censorship by law, but none of these protections are absolute and it is frequently necessary to balance conflicting rights in order to determine what can and cannot be censored.

==History== 1973 coup Pinochet regime in Chile.]] Tianamen Square Thomas Marsh.]] The Republic. The playwright Euripides (480-406 BC) defended the true liberty of freeborn men, the right to speak freely,. 

==Rationale==
The rationale for censorship is different for various types of information censored: obscene or otherwise considered morally questionable. Pornography, for example, is often censored under this rationale, especially child pornography, which is illegal and censored in most jurisdictions in the world.   tactics confidential and away from the enemy. This is used to counter espionage, which is the process of gleaning military information.
* Political censorship occurs when governments hold back information from their citizens. This is often done to exert control over the populace and prevent free expression that might foment rebellion.  Religious censorship is the means by which any material considered objectionable by a certain faith is removed. This often involves a dominant religion forcing limitations on less prevalent ones. Alternatively, one religion may shun the works of another when they believe the content is not appropriate for their faith.
* Corporate censorship is the process by which editors in corporate media outlets intervene to disrupt the publishing of information that portrays their business or business partners in a negative light,     or intervene to prevent alternate offers from reaching public exposure. 

==Types==

===Political===
 

 
 

Strict censorship existed in the Eastern Bloc.    Throughout the bloc, the various ministries of culture held a tight rein on their writers.    Cultural products there reflected the propaganda needs of the state.  Party-approved censors exercised strict control in the early years.    In the Stalinist period, even the weather forecasts were changed if they had the temerity to suggest that the sun might not shine on May Day.  Under Nicolae Ceauşescu in Peoples Republic of Romania|Romania, weather reports were doctored so that the temperatures were not seen to rise above or fall below the levels which dictated that work must stop. 

Independent journalism did not exist in the Soviet Union until Mikhail Gorbachev became its leader; all reporting was directed by the Communist Party or related organizations. Pravda, the predominant newspaper in the Soviet Union, had a monopoly. Foreign newspapers were available only if they were published by Communist Parties sympathetic to the Soviet Union.
 copying machines was tightly controlled in order to hinder production and distribution of samizdat, illegal self-publishing|self-published books and magazines.   Possession of even a single samizdat manuscript such as a book by Andrei Sinyavsky was a serious crime which might involve a visit from the KGB.  Another outlet for works which did not find favor with the authorities was publishing abroad.
 Golden Shield Project, to monitor the internet. Popular search engines such as Baidu also remove politically sensitive search results. 

Iraq under Baathist Saddam Hussein had much the same techniques of press censorship as did Romania under Nicolae Ceauşescu but with greater potential violence. 
 Communist Partys Department of Revolutionary Orientation, which "develops and coordinates propaganda strategies".    Connection to the Internet is restricted and censored.   

Censorship also takes place in capitalist nations, such as Uruguay. In 1973, a military coup took power in Uruguay, and the State practiced censorship. For example, writer Eduardo Galeano was imprisoned and later was forced to flee. His book Open Veins of Latin America was banned by the right-wing military government, not only in Uruguay, but also in Chile and Argentina. 

Critics of the Campaign finance reform in the United States claim that this reform imposes widespread restrictions on political speech.      

===State secrets and prevention of attention===
  of September 21, 1966.]] What happened in Bydgoszcz?) and "Pogotowie strajkowe w całym kraju" (Country-wide strike alert). The censor had removed a section regarding the strike alert; hence the workers in the printing house blanked out an official propaganda section. The right-hand page also includes a hand-written confirmation of that decision by the local Solidarity (Polish trade union)|"Solidarność" Trade Union.]]

In wartime, explicit censorship is carried out with the intent of preventing the release of information that might be useful to an enemy. Typically it involves keeping times or locations secret, or delaying the release of information (e.g., an operational objective) until it is of no possible use to enemy forces. The moral issues here are often seen as somewhat different, as the proponents of this form of censorship argues that release of tactical information usually presents a greater risk of casualties among ones own forces and could possibly lead to loss of the overall conflict.

During World War I letters written by British soldiers would have to go through censorship. This consisted of officers going through letters with a black marker and crossing out anything which might compromise operational secrecy before the letter was sent. The World War II catchphrase "Loose lips sink ships" was used as a common justification to exercise official wartime censorship and encourage individual restraint when sharing potentially sensitive information.
 USSR under Joseph Stalin, where publicly used photographs were often altered to remove people whom Stalin had condemned to execution. Though past photographs may have been remembered or kept, this deliberate and systematic alteration to all of history in the public mind is seen as one of the central themes of Stalinism and totalitarianism.

Censorship is occasionally carried out to aid authorities or to protect an individual, as with some kidnappings when attention and media coverage of the victim can sometimes be seen as unhelpful.  

===Religion===
 
Censorship by religion is a form of censorship where freedom of expression is controlled or limited using religious authority or on the basis of the teachings of the religion. This form of censorship has a long history and is practiced in many societies and by many religions. Examples include the Galileo affair, Edict of Compiègne, the Index Librorum Prohibitorum (list of prohibited books) and the condemnation of Salman Rushdies novel The Satanic Verses by Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

===Educational sources===
 n censorship. Book "Notes of my life by Nikolay Gretsch|N.I. Grech", published in St. Petersburg 1886 by A.S. Suvorin. The censored text was replaced by dots.]]
 reporting of military atrocities in history is extremely controversial, as in the case of The Holocaust (or Holocaust denial), Bombing of Dresden, the Nanking Massacre as found with Japanese history textbook controversies, the Armenian Genocide, the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, and the Winter Soldier Investigation of the Vietnam War.

In the context of secondary school education, the way facts and history are presented greatly influences the interpretation of contemporary thought, opinion and socialization. One argument for censoring the ty