 
  
 ]]

A chair is a piece of furniture with a raised surface used to sit on, commonly for use by one person. Chairs are most often supported by four legs and have a back;   however, a chair can have three legs or could have a different shape. 
 theater is a seat  or, in an airplane, airline seat;  when riding, it is a saddle  and bicycle saddle,  and for an automobile, a car seat  or infant car seat.   With wheels it is a wheelchair  and when hung from above, a swing (seat)|swing. 

A chair for more than one person is a couch|couch, sofa, settee, or "loveseat";  or a Bench (furniture)|bench.  A separate footrest for a chair is known as an Ottoman (furniture)|ottoman,  hassock  or pouffe. 

==History of the chair==
 
  19th Century Lifestyle Museum]]
 , with strong heraldic embellishment]]

The chair is known for its antiquity and simplicity, although for many centuries it was an article of state and dignity rather than an article of ordinary use. "The chair" is still extensively used as the emblem of authority in the House of Commons in the United Kingdom  and Canada,  and in many other settings.

Committees, boards of directors, and academic departments all have a chairman.  Endowed professorships are referred to as chairs.  
 bench and seigneurial origin. antiquity is derived almost entirely from monuments, sculpture and paintings. 

Chairs were in existence since at least the Early Dynastic Period. They were covered with cloth or leather, were made of carved wood and were much lower than todays chairs, chair seats were sometimes only 25&nbsp;cm high.    In ancient Egypt chairs appear to have been of great richness and splendor. Fashioned of ebony and ivory, or of carved and gilded wood, they were covered with costly materials, magnificent patterns and supported upon representations of the legs of beasts or the figures of captives.  Generally speaking, the higher ranked an individual was, the taller and more sumptuous was the chair he sat on and the greater the honor. On state occasions the pharaoh sat on a throne, often with a little footstool in front of it. 

The average Egyptian family seldom had chairs, and if they did, it was usually only the master of the household who sat on a chair. Among the better off, the chairs might be painted to look like the ornate inlaid and carved chairs of the rich, but the craftsmanship was usually poor.  
 
During the Tang dynasty (618 - 907 AD), a higher seat first started to appear amongst the Chinese elite and their usage soon spread to all levels of society. By the 12th century seating on the floor was rare in China, unlike in other Asian countries where the custom continued, and the chair, or more commonly the stool, was used in the vast majority of houses throughout the country. 

In Europe, it was owing in great measure to the Renaissance that the chair ceased to be a privilege of state, and became a standard item of furniture for anyone who could afford to buy it. Once the idea of privilege faded the chair speedily came into general use. We find almost at once that the chair began to change every few years to reflect the fashions of the day. {{cite web| url= http://www.randomhistory.com/2008/11/11_chair.html| title= From Benches to Barstools: A History of Chairs, Posture, and Society
| publisher= Random History| accessdate=2012-05-13}} 

In the 1880s, chairs became more common in American households and usually there was a chair provided for every family member to sit down to dinner. By the 1830s, factory-manufactured fancy chairs like those by Sears. Roebuck, and Co. allowed families to purchase machined sets. With the Industrial Revolution, chairs became much more available. 

The 20th century saw an increasing use of technology in chair construction with such things as all-metal folding chairs, metal-legged chairs, the Slumber Chair,  moulded plastic chairs  and ergonomic chairs.  The recliner became a popular form, at least in part due to radio and television. 
 bean bags, office use.  Motors embedded in the chair resulted in massage chairs. {{cite web| url=http://encyclopedia.thefreedictionary.com/Massage+chair 
| title=Massage Chair| publisher= The Free Dictionary By Farlex| accessdate=2012-05-13}}  

==Materials== drilled with holes for decoration; a low back or gaps can provide ventilation (architecture)|ventilation. The back may extend above the height of the occupants head, which can optionally contain a headrest. Chairs can also be made from more creative materials, such as recycled materials like cutlery and wooden play bricks, pencils, plumbing tubes, rope and pvc pipe. 

Raimonds Cirulis, a Latvian interior designer, created a Volcanic Hanging Chair that is a 100% handmade piece of furniture and is made out of volcanic rock.  Peter Brenner, a Dutch-born German designer, has created a chair made from lollipop sugar, made from 60 pounds of confectioners sugar. {{cite web| url= http://www.fastcodesign.com/1663657/a-chair-made-from-lollipop-sugar-customized-with-your-licks|title=A Chair Made From Lollipop Sugar, Customized With Your Licks
| publisher= Co.DESIGN | accessdate=2012-05-13}} 

==Design and ergonomics==
 
 , Designed by Verner Panton]]
 

Chair design considers intended usage, ergonomics (how comfortable it is for the occupant),  as well as non-ergonomic functional requirements such as size,  stackability, foldability, weight, durability, stain resistance and artistic design.  Intended usage determines the desired seating position.  "Task chairs",   or any chair intended for people to work at a desk or table, including dining chairs, can only recline very slightly; otherwise the occupant is too far away from the desk or table. Dental chairs are necessarily reclined.  Easy chairs for watching television or movies are somewhere in between depending on the height of the screen.
 popliteal fold").  It may also  result in no weight on the feet which means more weight elsewhere.   A lower seat may shift too much weight to the "seat bones" ("ischial tuberosities").

A reclining seat and back will shift weight to the occupants back. This may be more comfortable for some in reducing weight on the seat area, but may be problematic for others who have bad backs.  In general, if the occupant is supposed to sit for a long time, weight needs to be taken off the seat area and thus "easy" chairs intended for long periods of sitting are generally at least slightly reclined.  However, reclining may not be suitable for chairs intended for work or eating at table.
 Reclining chairs typically have at least shoulder height backrests to shift weight to the shoulders instead of just the lower back.
 stool or other simple chair may have a simple straight or curved bar near the bottom for the sitter to place his or her feet on.

Some chairs have two curved bands of wood (also known as rockers) attached to the bottom of the legs.  They are called rocking chairs.

 , China: with a fairly low seat and the back inclined at about 45 degrees from the vertical]]

A kneeling chair adds an additional body part, the knees, to support the weight of the body.  A sit-stand chair distributes most of the weight of the occupant to the feet. Many chairs are padded or have cushions.  Padding can be on the seat of the chair only, on the seat and back, or also on any arm rests and/or foot rest the chair may have.  Padding will not shift the weight to different parts of the body (unless the chair is so soft that the shape is altered).  However, padding does distribute the weight by increasing the area of contact between the chair and the body.   A hard wood chair feels hard because the contact point between the occupant and the chair is small.  The same body weight over a smaller area means greater pressure on that area.  Spreading the area reduces the pressure at any given point.  In lieu of padding, flexible materials, such as wicker, may be used instead with similar effects of distributing the weight.   Since most of the body weight is supported in the back of the seat, padding there should be firmer than the front of the seat which only has the weight of the legs to support.  Chairs that have paddin