 
 
 
 deterring and rehabilitation efforts. protections against abuse of investigatory and prosecution powers.

==Goals==
In the United States, criminal justice policy has been guided by the 1967 Presidents Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice, which issued a ground-breaking  report "The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society".  This report made more than 200 recommendations as part of a comprehensive approach toward the prevention and fighting of crime.  Some of those recommendations found their way into the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968.  The Commission advocated a "systems" approach to criminal justice, with improved coordination among law enforcement, courts, and correctional agencies.   The Presidents Commission defined the criminal justice system as the means for society to "enforce the standards of conduct necessary to protect individuals and the community." 

The criminal justice system in England and Wales aims to "reduce crime by bringing more offences to justice, and to raise public confidence that the system is fair and will deliver for the law-abiding citizen."     In Canada, the criminal justice system aims to balance the goals of crime control and prevention, and justice (equity, fairness, protection of individual rights).   In Sweden, the overarching goal for the criminal justice system is to reduce crime and increase the security of the people.  Overall, criminal justice plays a huge role throughout society as a whole in any place.

==Law==
 

Law  is a system of rules usually enforced through a set of institutions.  The purpose of law is to provide an objective set of rules for governing conduct and maintaining order in a society.
 philosophers or theocracy|religion. In the modern world, laws are typically created and enforced by governments.  These codified laws may coexist with or contradict other forms of social control, such as religious proscriptions, professional rules and ethics, or the cultural mores and customs of a society.
 Civil laws are rules and regulations which govern transactions and grievances between individual citizens.  Criminal law is concerned with actions which are dangerous or harmful to society as a whole, in which prosecution is pursued not by an individual but rather by the state. The purpose of criminal law is to provide the specific definition of what constitutes a crime and to prescribe punishments for committing such a crime.  No criminal law can be valid unless it includes both of these factors.  The subject of criminal justice is, of course, primarily concerned with the enforcement of criminal law.

==Criminal justice system==
===Definition===
The criminal justice system consists of three main parts: (1) Legislative (create laws); (2) adjudication  (courts); and (3) corrections (jails, prisons, probation and parole).  In the criminal justice system, these distinct agencies operate together both under the rule of law and as the principal means of maintaining the rule of law within society. 

For the purposes of section 8(6) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1995 and section 194A(6) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, the criminal justice system includes, in particular, the investigation of offences and the treatment of offenders. 

===Policing===
  state that Marine Police Glasgow Police, Napoleonic Prefecture police of Paris.   {{cite web| title =La Lieutenance Générale de Police| work =La Préfecture de Police fête ses 200 ans
Juillet 1800 - Juillet 2000| publisher =La Préfecture de Police au service des Parisiens| url =http://www.prefecture-police-paris.interieur.gouv.fr/documentation/bicentenaire/theme_expo1.htm| accessdate =}} 
 order maintenance and the provision of services. 

====Courts====
 

The courts serve as the venue where disputes are then settled and justice is administered.  With regard to criminal justice, there are a number of critical people in any court setting. These critical people are referred to as the courtroom work group and include both professional and non professional individuals.  These include the judge, prosecutor, and the defense attorney.  The judge, or magistrate, is a person, elected or appointed, who is knowledgeable in the law, and whose function is to objectively administer the legal proceedings and offer a final decision to dispose of a case.
 guilt or innocence (although in the U.S. a jury can never find a defendant "innocent" but rather "not guilty") is decided through the adversarial system.  In this system, two parties will both offer their version of events and argue their case before the court (sometimes before a judge or panel of judges, sometimes before a jury).  The case should be decided in favor of the party who offers the most sound and compelling arguments based on the law as applied to the facts of the case.

The prosecutor, or district attorney, is a lawyer who brings charges against a person, persons or corporate entity.  It is the prosecutors duty to explain to the court what crime was committed and to detail what evidence has been found which incriminates the accused.  The prosecutor should not be confused with a plaintiff or plaintiffs counsel.  Although both serve the function of bringing a complaint before the court, the prosecutor is a servant of the state who makes accusations on behalf of the state in criminal proceedings, while the plaintiff is the complaining party in civil proceedings.

A defense attorney counsels the accused on the legal process, likely outcomes for the accused and suggests strategies.  The accused, not the lawyer, has the right to make final decisions regarding a number of fundamental points, including whether to testify, and to accept a plea offer or demand a jury trial in appropriate cases.  It is the defense attorneys duty to represent the interests of the client, raise procedural and evidentiary issues, and hold the prosecution to its burden of proving guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Defense counsel may challenge evidence presented by the prosecution or present exculpatory evidence and argue on behalf of their client.  At trial, the defense attorney may attempt to offer a rebuttal to the prosecutors accusations.
 Tudor England criminals accused of treason were not permitted to offer arguments in their defense.  In many jurisdictions, there is no right to an appointed attorney, if the accused is not in jeopardy of losing his or her liberty.

The final determination of guilt or innocence is typically made by a third party, who is supposed to be disinterested. This function may be performed by a judge, a panel of judges, or a jury panel composed of unbiased citizens. This process varies depending on the laws of the specific jurisdiction. In some places the panel (be it judges or a jury) is required to issue a unanimous decision, while in others only a majority vote is required. In America, this process depends on the state, level of court, and even agreements between the prosecuting and defending parties.  Some nations do not use juries at all, or rely on theological or military authorities to issue verdicts.

Some cases can be disposed of without the need for a trial.  In fact, the vast majority are.  If the accused confesses his or her guilt, a shorter process may be employed and a judgment may be rendered more quickly. Some nations, such as America, allow plea bargaining in which the accused pleads guilty, nolo contendere or not guilty, and may accept a diversion program or reduced punishment, where the prosecutions case is weak or in exchange for the cooperation of the accused against other people. This reduced sentence is sometimes a reward for sparing the state the expense of a formal trial. Many nations do not permit the use of plea bargaining, believing that it coerces innocent people to plead guilty in an attempt to avoid a harsh punishment.

The entire trial process, whatever the country, is fraught with problems and subject to criticism.  Bias and discrimination form an ever-present threat to an objective decision.  Any prejudice on the part of the lawyers, the judge, or jury members threatens to destroy the courts credibility. Some peopl