 
 
 
  symbol of death]]

Death is the permanent cessation of all  ), predation, malnutrition, disease, suicide, murder and accidents or trauma resulting in terminal physical injury|injury.  Bodies of living organisms begin to decompose shortly after death. The death of an organism also results in a permanent absence of consciousness.  
 philosophical inquiry. oblivion (associated sometimes with atheism). 
 funereal practices. interred whole mortuary disposal. In the English language, blessings directed towards a deceased person include rest in peace, or its initials RIP.
 heart disease, followed by stroke and other cerebrovascular diseases, and on the third place lower respiratory infections. 

== Etymology ==
The word death comes from Old English dea, which in turn comes from Proto-Germanic *dauaz (reconstructed by etymological analysis).  This comes from the Proto-Indo-European stem *dheu- meaning the "Process, act, condition of dying".

== Associated terms ==

The concept and symptoms of death, and varying degrees of delicacy used in discussion in public forums, have generated numerous scientific, legal, and socially acceptable terms or euphemisms for death.  When a person has died, it is also said they have passed away, passed on, or expired, among numerous other socially accepted, religiously specific, slang, and irreverent terms. Bereft of life, the dead person is then a corpse, cadaver, a body, a set of remains, and finally a skeleton.  The terms carrion and carcass can also be used, though these more often connote the remains of non-human animals.  As a polite reference to a dead person, it has become common practice to use the participle form of "decease", as in the deceased; the noun form is decedent.  The ashes left after a cremation are sometimes referred to by the neologism cremains, a portmanteau of "cremation" and "remains".

== Senescence ==
 ]]

Almost all  . One of the very few known possible exceptions is the jellyfish Turritopsis nutricula, thought to be, in effect, biological immortality|immortal.  Unnatural causes of death include suicide and homicide. From all causes, roughly 150,000 people die around the world each day.    Of these, two thirds die directly or indirectly due to senescence, but in industrialized countriessuch as the United States, the United Kingdom, and Germanythe rate approaches 90%, i.e., nearly nine out of ten of all deaths are related to senescence. 
 heart and lungs determined brain dead scientific knowledge and medicine advance, a precise medical definition of death becomes more problematic. 

== Signs of death ==

Signs of death or strong indications that an animal is no longer alive are:
* Cessation of breathing
* Cardiac arrest (no heart rate|pulse)
*  , paleness which happens in the 15120 minutes after death
*  , a settling of the blood in the lower (dependent) portion of the body
*  , the reduction in body temperature following death. This is generally a steady decline until matching ambient temperature
*  , the limbs of the corpse become stiff (Latin rigor) and difficult to move or manipulate
* Decomposition, the reduction into simpler forms of matter, accompanied by a strong, unpleasant odor.

== Diagnosis ==

=== Problems of definition ===
 , Death and Time in this 17th-century painting by Philippe de Champaigne]]
 )]]

The concept of death is a key to human understanding of the phenomenon. Mohammad Samir Hossain and Peter Gilbert. 2010. Concepts of Death: A key to our adjustment. Illness, Crisis and Loss, Vol 18. No 1  There are many scientific approaches to the concept. For example, brain death, as practiced in medical science, defines death as a point in time at which brain activity ceases.    

One of the challenges in defining death is in distinguishing it from life. As a point in time, death would seem to refer to the moment at which life ends. However, determining when death has occurred requires drawing precise conceptual boundaries between life and death. This is problematic because there is little consensus over how to define life. This general problem applies to the particular challenge of defining death in the context of medicine.
 Abrahamic and Dharmic traditions, hold that death does not (or may not) entail the end of consciousness.  In certain cultures, death is more of a process than a single event.  It implies a slow shift from one spiritual state to another. 

Other definitions for death focus on the character of cessation of something.  In this context "death" describes merely the state where something has ceased, for example, life. Thus, the definition of "life" simultaneously defines death.
 CPR and causally linked to death in the past no longer kill in all circumstances; without a functioning heart or lungs, life can sometimes be sustained with a combination of life support devices, organ transplants and artificial pacemakers.
 sleep stages, EEGs can easily tell the difference.

However, the category of "brain death" is seen by some scholars to be problematic. For instance, Dr. Franklin Miller, senior faculty member at the Department of Bioethics, National Institutes of Health, notes: "By the late 1990s, however, the equation of brain death with death of the human being was increasingly challenged by scholars, based on evidence regarding the array of biological functioning displayed by patients correctly diagnosed as having this condition who were maintained on mechanical ventilation for substantial periods of time. These patients maintained the ability to sustain circulation and respiration, control temperature, excrete wastes, heal wounds, fight infections and, most dramatically, to gestate fetuses (in the case of pregnant "brain-dead" women)." FG Miller "Death and organ donation: back to the future" Journal of Medical Ethics 2009;35:616-620 
 cognitive function, personality is American politics.

Even by whole-brain criteria, the determination of brain death can be complicated. EEGs can detect spurious electrical impulses, while certain drugs, hypoglycemia, hypoxia (medical)|hypoxia, or hypothermia can suppress or even stop brain activity on a temporary basis. Because of this, hospitals have protocols for determining brain death involving EEGs at widely separated intervals under defined conditions.

=== Legal ===
 
 
  sprawled out in Petersburg, Virginia, 1865, during the American Civil War]]

In the United States, a person is dead by law if a Statement of Death or Death certificate is approved by a licensed medical practitioner. Various legal consequences follow death, including the removal from the person of what in legal terminology is called personhood.
 necessary condition San Bernardino County, 193 Cal.Rptr. 288, 291 (1983))

=== Misdiagnosed ===
 

There are many anecdotal references to people being declared dead by physicians and then "coming back to life", sometimes days later in their own coffin, or when embalming procedures are about to begin. From the mid-18th century onwards, there was an upsurge in the publics fear of being mistakenly buried alive,  and much debate about the uncertainty of the signs of death. Various suggestions were made to test for signs of life before burial, ranging from pouring vinegar and pepper into the corpses mouth to applying red hot pokers to the feet or into the rectum.  Writing in 1895, the physician J.C. Ouseley claimed that as many as 2,700&nbsp;people were buried prematurely each year in England and Wales, although others estimated the figure to be closer to 800. 
 emergency room. metabolic activity and oxygen requirements are minimal, is something humans share with cetaceans called the mammalian diving reflex. 

As medical technologies advance, ideas about when death occurs may have to be re-evaluated in light of the ability to restore a person to vitality after longer periods of apparent death (as happened when CPR and defibrillation showed that cessation of heartbeat is inadequate as a decisive indicator of death). The lack of electrical brain activity may not be enough to consider someone scientifically dead. Therefore, the concept of information-theoretic death has been suggested as a bett