 
 
 
{{Automatic taxobox name = Dinosaurs fossil_range =   image = Various_dinosaurs2.png image_width = 285px image_caption = A collection of fossil dinosaur skeletons. Clockwise from top left: Microraptor gui (a winged theropod), Apatosaurus louisae (a giant sauropod), Stegosaurus stenops (a plated stegosaur), Triceratops horridus (a horned ceratopsian), Edmontosaurus regalis (a duck-billed ornithopod), Gastonia burgei (an armored ankylosaur). authority = Richard Owen|Owen, 1842 subdivision_ranks = Major groups subdivision =
*  Ornithischia
**  Stegosauria
**  Ankylosauria
**  Ornithopoda
**  Ceratopsia
* Saurischia
**  Sauropodomorpha
** Theropoda
}}
Dinosaurs are a diverse group of animals of the clade Dinosauria. They first appeared during the Triassic period, approximately 230&nbsp;million years ago, and were the dominant terrestrial vertebrates for 135&nbsp;million years, from the beginning of the Jurassic (about 201&nbsp;million years ago) until the end of the Cretaceous (66&nbsp;million years ago), when the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event led to the extinction of most dinosaur groups at the close of the Mesozoic Era. The fossil record indicates that birds evolved from theropod dinosaurs during the Jurassic Period and, consequently, they are considered a subgroup of dinosaurs by many paleontologists.  Some birds survived the extinction event that occurred 66 million years ago, and their descendants continue the dinosaur lineage to the present day. 

Dinosaurs are a varied group of animals from taxonomic, morphological and ecological standpoints. Birds, at over 9,000 living species, are the most diverse group of vertebrates besides  , for example, was only about 50&nbsp;cm (20&nbsp;in) long.
 sprawling limb research conducted since the 1970s, however, has indicated that all dinosaurs were active animals with elevated metabolisms and numerous adaptations for social interaction.
 Jurassic Park. Persistent public enthusiasm for the animals has resulted in significant funding for dinosaur science, and new discoveries are regularly covered by the media.

==Etymology==
The   (deinos, meaning "terrible," "potent," or "fearfully great") and   (sauros, meaning "lizard" or "reptile").    Though the taxonomic name has often been interpreted as a reference to dinosaurs teeth, claws, and other fearsome characteristics, Owen intended it merely to evoke their size and majesty. 

==Definition==
  skeleton, American Museum of Natural History]] theropods (mostly bipedal carnivores ornithopods (bipedal sauropodomorphs (mostly herbivorous quadrupeds with long necks and tails).

  (Passer domesticus) is often used to represent modern birds in definitions of the group Dinosauria]]
Many paleontologists note that the point at which sauropodomorphs and theropods diverged may omit sauropodomorphs from the definition for both saurischians and dinosaurs. To avoid instability, Dinosauria can be more conservatively defined with respect to four anchoring nodes: Triceratops horridus, Saltasaurus loricatus, and Passer domesticus, their MRCA, and all descendants. This "safer" definition can be expressed as "Dinosauria = Ornithischia + Sauropodomorpha + Theropoda". 

There is near universal consensus among paleontologists that birds are the descendants of theropod dinosaurs. In traditional taxonomy, birds were considered a separate "class (biology)|class" that had evolved from dinosaurs. However, a majority of modern paleontologists reject the traditional style of classification in favor of phylogenetic nomenclature, which requires that all descendants of a single common ancestor must be included in a group for that group to be natural. Birds are thus considered by most modern scientists to be dinosaurs and dinosaurs are, therefore, not extinct. Birds are classified by most paleontologists as belonging to the subgroup Maniraptora, which are Coelurosauria|coelurosaurs, which are theropods, which are saurischians, which are dinosaurs. 
 

===General description=== limbs held erect beneath the body.  Many prehistoric animal groups are popularly conceived of as dinosaurs, such as ichthyosaurs, mosasaurs, plesiosaurs, pterosaurs, and Dimetrodon, but are not classified scientifically as dinosaurs, and none had the erect limb posture characteristic of true dinosaurs.  Dinosaurs were the dominant terrestrial vertebrates of the Mesozoic, especially the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods. Other groups of animals were restricted in size and niches; mammals, for example, rarely exceeded the size of a cat, and were generally rodent-sized carnivores of small prey. 

  skeleton, Field Museum]] bony armor. Although known for large size, many Mesozoic dinosaurs were human-sized or smaller, and modern birds are generally small in size. Dinosaurs today inhabit every continent, and fossils show that they had achieved global distribution by at least the early Jurassic period.  Modern birds inhabit most available habitats, from terrestrial to marine, and there is evidence that some non-avialan dinosaurs (such as Microraptor) could fly or at least glide, and others, such as spinosauridae|spinosaurids, had semi-aquatic habits. 

===Distinguishing anatomical features===
While recent discoveries have made it more difficult to present a universally agreed-upon list of dinosaurs distinguishing features, nearly all dinosaurs discovered so far share certain modifications to the ancestral archosaurian skeleton. Although some later groups of dinosaurs featured further modified versions of these traits, they are considered typical across Dinosauria; the earliest dinosaurs had them and passed them on to all their descendants. Such common features across a taxonomic group are called synapomorphy|synapomorphies.

A detailed assessment of archosaur interrelations by S. Nesbitt  confirmed or found the following 12 unambiguous synapomorphies, some previously known: fenestra
* epipophyses present in anterior neck vertebrae (except atlas and axis) deltopectoral muscles attach) located at or more than 30% down the length of the humerus (upper arm bone) radius shorter than 80% of humerus length
* fourth trochanter (projection where the caudofemoralis muscle attaches) on the femur (thigh bone) is a sharp flange
* fourth trochanter asymmetrical, with distal margin forming a steeper angle to the shaft astragalus and calcaneum the proximal articular facet for fibula occupies less than 30% of the transverse width of the element
* exocciptials (bones at the back of the skull) do not meet along the midline on the floor of the endocranial cavity ilium and pubis separated by a large concave surface
* cnemial crest on the tibia (shinbone) arcs anterolaterally
* distinct proximodistally oriented ridge present on the posterior face of the distal end of the tibia
Nesbitt found a number of further potential synapomorphies, and discounted a number of synapomorphies previously suggested. Some of these are also present in Silesauridae|silesaurids, which Nesbitt recovered as a sister group to Dinosauria, including a large anterior trochanter, metatarsals II and IV of subequal length, reduced contact between ischium and pubis, the presence of a cnemial crest on the tibia and of an ascending process on the astragalus,  and many others.

 
 ns (right)]] snout and perforate acetabulum, or hip socket, with a hole at the center of its inside surface (closed in Saturnalia (dinosaur)|Saturnalia, for example).     Another difficulty of determining distinctly dinosaurian features is that early dinosaurs and other archosaurs from the Late Triassic are often poorly known and were similar in many ways; these animals have sometimes been misidentified in the literature. 
 upper pelvic bone was rotated to form an overhanging shelf. 

==Evolutionary history==
 

===Origins and early evolution===
 ]]
  (large), Eoraptor (small) and a Plateosaurus skull]] common ancestor Argentinian Middle Triassic strata supports this view; analysis of recovered fossils suggests that these animals were indeed small, bipedal predators. Dinosaurs may have appeared as early as 243 million years ago, as evidenced by remains of the genus Nyasasaurus from that period, though known fossils of these animals are too fragmentary to tell if they are dinosaurs or very close dinosaurian relatives. Nesbitt, S. J., Barrett, P. M., Werning, S., Sidor, C. A., and A. J. Charig. (2012). "The oldest dinosaur? A Middle Triassic dinosauriform from Tanzania." Biology Letters. 
 prolacertiforms and diversified through stages of the Triassic, most likely by occupying the niches of the groups that became extinct.

===Evolution and paleobiogeography=== coelophysoid carnivores Tendaguru Beds sinraptorid theropods ornithopods were also becoming more common, but prosauropods had become extinct. Conifers and pteridophytes were the most common plants. Sauropods, like the earlier prosauropods, were not oral processors, but ornithischians were evolving various means of dealing with food in the mouth, including potential cheek-like organs to keep food in the mouth, and jaw motions to grind food.  Another notable evolutionary event of the Jurassic was the appearance of true birds, descended from maniraptoran coelurosaurians. 
 brachiosaurids through carcharodontosaurid theropods, rebbachisaurid and ankylosaurids and flowering plants. At the same time, several groups of dinosaurian herbivores evolved more sophisticated ways to orally process food. Ceratopsians developed a method of slicing with teeth stacked on each other in batteries, and iguanodontians refined a method of grinding with tooth batteries, taken to its extreme in hadrosaurids.  Some sauropods also evolved tooth batteries, best exemplified by the rebbachisaurid Nigersaurus. 
 tyrannosaurids and abelisaurids were rhabdodontid iguanodontians, nodosaurid ankylosaurians, and titanosaurian sauropods were prevalent.  Flowering plants were greatly radiating,  with the first grasses appearing by the end of the Cretaceous.  Grinding hadrosaurids and shearing ceratopsians became extremely diverse across North America and Asia. Theropods were also radiating as herbivores or omnivores, with therizinosaurians and ornithomimosaurians becoming common. 
 neornithine birds. Some other diapsid groups, such as crocodilians, sebecosuchians, turtles, lizards, snakes, sphenodontians, and choristoderans, also survived the event. 
 ducks and chickens, and a variety of Charadriiformes|waterbirds, diversified rapidly at the beginning of the Paleogene period, entering ecological niches left vacant by the extinction of Mesozoic dinosaur groups such as the arboreal enantiornithines, aquatic hesperornithines, and even the larger terrestrial theropods (in the form of Gastornis, mihirungs, and "terror birds"). However, mammals were also rapidly diversifying during this time, and out-competed the neornithines for dominance of most terrestrial niches. Lindow, B.E.K. (2011). "Bird Evolution Across the K–Pg Boundary and the Basal Neornithine Diversification." In Dyke, G. and Kaiser, G. (eds.)Living Dinosaurs: The Evolutionary History of Modern Birds, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK.   

==Classification==
 

Dinosaurs are archosaurs, like modern crocodilians. Within the archosaur group, dinosaurs are differentiated most noticeably by their gait. Dinosaur legs extend directly beneath the body, whereas the legs of lizards and crocodilians sprawl out to either side.
 taxa sharing pelvic structure. Greek sauros pubis bone theropods (exclusively sauropodomorphs (long-necked herbivores which include advanced, quadrupedal groups).
 caudally (rear-pointing). Unlike birds, the ornithischian pubis also usually had an additional forward-pointing process. Ornithischia includes a variety of species which were primarily herbivores. (NB: the terms "lizard hip" and "bird hip" are misnomers&nbsp;– birds evolved from dinosaurs with "lizard hips".)

   Saurischian pelvis structure (left side)
Image:Tyrannosaurus pelvis left.jpg|Tyrannosaurus pelvis (showing saurischian structure&nbsp;– left side) Ornithischian pelvis structure (left side)
Image:Edmontosaurus pelvis left.jpg|Edmontosaurus pelvis (showing ornithischian structure&nbsp;– left side)
  

===Taxonomy===
The following is a simplified classification of dinosaur groups based on their evolutionary relationships, and organized based on the list of Mesozoic dinosaur species provided by Holtz (2008). Holtz, Thomas R. Jr. (2011) Dinosaurs: The Most Complete, Up-to-Date Encyclopedia for Dinosaur Lovers of All Ages,    A more detailed version can be found at Dinosaur classification.
The cross (†) is used to signify groups with no living members.

*Dinosauria
:*Saurischia ("lizard-hipped"; includes Theropoda and Sauropodomorpha)
::*Theropoda (all Bipedalism|bipedal; most were carnivorous)
:::*†Herrerasauria (early bipedal carnivores)
:::*†Coelophysoidea (small, early theropods; includes Coelophysis and close relatives)
:::*†Dilophosauridae (early crested and carnivorous theropods)
:::*†Ceratosauria (generally elaborately horned, the dominant southern carnivores of the Cretaceous)
:::*Tetanurae ("stiff tails"; includes most theropods)
::::*†Megalosauroidea (early group of large carnivores including the semi-aquatic spinosaurids)
::::*†Carnosauria (Allosaurus and close relatives, like Carcharodontosaurus)
::::*Coelurosauria (feathered theropods, with a range of body sizes and niches)
:::::*†Compsognathidae (common early coelurosaurs with reduced forelimbs)
:::::*†Tyrannosauridae (Tyrannosaurus and close relatives; had reduced forelimbs)
:::::*†Ornithomimosauria ("ostrich-mimics"; mostly toothless; carnivores to possible herbivores)
:::::*†Alvarezsauroidea (small insectivores with reduced forelimbs each bearing one enlarged claw)
:::::*Maniraptora ("hand snatchers"; had long, slender arms and fingers)
::::::*†Therizinosauria (bipedal herbivores with large hand claws and small heads)
::::::*†Oviraptorosauria (mostly toothless; their diet and lifestyle are uncertain)
::::::*†Archaeopterygidae (small, winged theropods or primitive birds)
::::::*†Deinonychosauria (small- to medium-sized; bird-like, with a distinctive toe claw)
::::::*Avialae (modern birds and extinct relatives)
:::::::*†Scansoriopterygidae (small primitive avialans with long third fingers)
:::::::*†Omnivoropterygidae (large, early short-tailed avialans)
:::::::*†Confuciusornithidae (small toothless avialans)
:::::::*†Enantiornithes (primitive tree-dwelling, flying avialans)
:::::::*Euornithes (advanced flying birds)
::::::::*†Yanornithiformes (toothed Cretaceous Chinese birds)
::::::::*†Hesperornithes (specialized aquatic diving birds)
::::::::*Aves (modern, beaked birds and their extinct relatives)
   , Brachiosaurus, Giraffatitan, and Euhelopus]]
::*†Sauropodomorpha (herbivores with small heads, long necks, long tails)
:::*†Guaibasauridae (small, primitive, omnivorous sauropodomorphs)
:::*†Plateosauridae (primitive, strictly bipedal "prosauropods")
:::*†Riojasauridae (small, primitive sauropodomorphs)
:::*†Massospondylidae (small, primitive sauropodomorphs)
:::*†Sauropoda (very large and heavy, usually over 15 meters (49 feet) long; quadrupedal)
::::*†Vulcanodontidae (primitive sauropods with pillar-like limbs)
::::*†Eusauropoda ("true sauropods")
:::::*†Cetiosauridae ("whale reptiles")
:::::*†Turiasauria (European group of Jurassic and Cretaceous sauropods)
:::::*†Neosauropoda ("new sauropods")
::::::*†Diplodocoidea (skulls and tails elongated; teeth typically narrow and pencil-like)
::::::*†Macronaria (boxy skulls; spoon- or pencil-shaped teeth)
:::::::*†Brachiosauridae (long-necked, long-armed macronarians)
:::::::*†Titanosauria (diverse; stocky, with wide hips; most common in the Late Cretaceous of southern continents)
  dinosaurs and one  , left:  , center foreground:  , far right (small): Heterodontosaurus, far right (large) Tenontosaurus.]]
:*†Ornithischia ("bird-hipped"; diverse bipedal and quadrupedal herbivores)
::*†Heterodontosauridae (small basal ornithopod herbivores/omnivores with prominent canine tooth|canine-like teeth)
::*†Thyreophora (armored dinosaurs; mostly quadrupeds)
:::*†Ankylosauria (scutes as primary armor; some had club-like tails)
:::*†Stegosauria (spikes and plates as primary armor)
::*†Neornithischia ("new ornithischians")
:::*†Ornithopoda (various sizes; bipeds and quadrupeds; evolved a method of chewing using skull flexibility and numerous teeth)
:::*†Marginocephalia (characterized by a cranial growth)
::::*†Pachycephalosauria (bipeds with domed or knobby growth on skulls)
::::*†Ceratopsia (quadrupeds with frills; many also had horns)

==Biology== internal organs and soft tissues.     Many fields of study contribute to our understanding of dinosaurs, including physics (especially biomechanics), chemistry, biology, and the earth sciences (of which paleontology is a sub-discipline). Two topics of particular interest and study have been dinosaur size and behavior.

===Size===
 
 s and a human]] recent predatory mode of Mesozoic dinosaur body masses is between one and ten metric tonnes.  This contrasts sharply with the size of Cenozoic mammals, estimated by the National Museum of Natural History as about 2 to 5&nbsp;kilograms (5 to 10&nbsp;lb). 
 sauropods were the largest and heaviest dinosaurs. For much of the dinosaur era, the smallest sauropods were larger than anything else in their habitat, and the largest were an order of magnitude more massive than anything else that has since walked the Earth. Giant prehistoric mammals such as the Paraceratherium (the largest land mammal ever) were dwarfed by the giant sauropods, and only modern whales approach or surpass them in size.  There are several proposed advantages for the large size of sauropods, including protection from predation, reduction of energy use, and longevity, but it may be that the most important advantage was dietary. Large animals are more efficient at digestion than small animals, because food spends more time in their digestive systems. This also permits them to subsist on food with lower nutritive value than smaller animals. Sauropod remains are mostly found in rock formations interpreted as dry or seasonally dry, and the ability to eat large quantities of low-nutrient browse would have been advantageous in such environments. 

====Largest and smallest==== largest and smallest dinosaurs to have ever existed. This is because only a tiny percentage of animals ever fossilize, and most of these remain buried in the earth. Few of the specimens that are recovered are complete skeletons, and impressions of skin and other soft tissues are rare. Rebuilding a complete skeleton by comparing the size and morphology of bones to those of similar, better-known species is an inexact art, and reconstructing the muscles and other organs of the living animal is, at best, a process of educated guesswork.

 ]] Giraffatitan brancai Museum für Naturkunde Berlin;  this mount is   tall and   long, and would have belonged to an animal that weighed between   and  &nbsp;kilograms (  and  &nbsp;lb). The longest complete dinosaur is the 27-meter (89&nbsp;ft) long Diplodocus, which was discovered in Wyoming in the United States and displayed in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania|Pittsburghs Carnegie Natural History Museum in 1907.
 ]] herbivorous specimens Diplodocus hallorum Amphicoelias fragillimus, carnivorous dinosaur was Spinosaurus, reaching a length of 16 to 18&nbsp;meters (52 to 60&nbsp;ft), and weighing in at 8150&nbsp;kg (  lb).  Other large meat-eaters included Giganotosaurus, Carcharodontosaurus and Tyrannosaurus. 

Not including birds (Avialae), the smallest known dinosaurs were about the size of pigeons.  Not surprisingly, the smallest non-avialan dinosaurs were those theropods most closely related to birds. Anchiornis huxleyi, for example, had a total skeletal length of under 35&nbsp;centimeters (1.1&nbsp;ft).   A. huxleyi is currently the smallest non-avialan dinosaur described from an adult specimen, with an estimated weight of 110&nbsp;grams.  The smallest herbivorous non-avialan dinosaurs included Microceratus and Wannanosaurus, at about 60&nbsp;cm (2&nbsp;ft) long each.  

===Behavior===
  was discovered in 1978.]]

Many modern birds are highly social, often found living in flocks. There is general agreement that some behaviors which are common in birds, as well as in crocodiles (birds closest living relatives), were also common among extinct dinosaur groups. Interpretations of behavior in fossil species are generally based on the pose of skeletons and their Habitat (ecology)|habitat, computer simulations of their biomechanics, and comparisons with modern animals in similar ecological niches.
 flocking as migratory purposes, taphonomic evidence suggesting mammal-like pack hunting in such theropods as Deinonychus and Allosaurus can also be interpreted as the results of fatal disputes between feeding animals, as is seen in many modern diapsid predators. 

  engaged in intra-specific combat.]] frills of some dinosaurs, like the marginocephalians, theropods and lambeosaurines, may have been too fragile to be used for active defense, and so they were likely used for sexual or aggressive displays, though little is known about dinosaur mating and territory (animal)|territorialism. Head wounds from bites suggest that theropods, at least, engaged in active aggressive confrontations. 
 Cannibalism amongst some species of dinosaurs was confirmed by tooth marks found in Madagascar in 2003, involving the theropod Majungasaurus. 
 scleral rings herbivorous and omnivorous dinosaurs ornithomimosaurs may have been cathemeral, active during short intervals throughout the day, although the small ornithischian Agilisaurus was inferred to be Diurnality|diurnal. 
 dromaeosaurids such as Microraptor ) most non-avialan dinosaurs seem to have relied on land-based locomotion. A good understanding of how dinosaurs moved on the ground is key to models of dinosaur behavior; the science of biomechanics, in particular, has provided significant insight in this area. For example, studies of the forces exerted by muscles and gravity on dinosaurs skeletal structure have investigated how fast dinosaurs could run,  whether diplodocids could create sonic booms via whip-like tail snapping,  and whether sauropods could float. 

===Communication===
 ]] communicating using vocalizations (though the hollow crests of the lambeosaurines could have functioned as resonance chambers used for a wide range of vocalizations).   To draw this conclusion, Senter studied the distribution of vocal organs in modern reptiles and birds. He found that vocal cords in the larynx probably evolved multiple times among reptiles, including crocodilians, which are able to produce guttural roars. Birds, on the other hand, lack a larynx. Instead, bird calls are produced by the Syrinx (biology)|syrinx, a vocal organ found only in birds, and which is not related to the larynx, meaning it evolved independently from the vocal organs in reptiles. The syrinx depends on the air sac system in birds to function; specifically, it requires the presence of a clavicular air sac near the wishbone or collar bone. This air sac leaves distinctive marks or opening on the bones, including a distinct opening in the upper arm bone (humerus). While extensive air sac systems are a unique characteristic of saurischian dinosaurs, the clavicular air sac necessary to vocalize does not appear in the fossil record until the enantiornithines (one exception, Aerosteon, probably evolved its clavicular air sac independently of birds for reasons other than vocalization). 

The most primitive dinosaurs with evidence of a vocalizing syrinx are the enantironithine birds. Any bird-line archosaurs more primitive than this probably did not make vocal calls. Rather, several lines of evidence suggest that early dinosaurs used primarily visual communication, in the form of distinctive-looking (and possibly brightly colored) horns, frills, crests, sails and feathers. This is similar to some modern reptile groups such as lizards, in which many forms are largely silent (though like dinosaurs they possess well-developed senses of hearing) but use complex coloration and display behaviors to communicate. 

In addition, dinosaurs use other methods of producing sound for communication. Other animals, including other reptiles, use a wide variety of non-vocal sound communication, including hissing, jaw grinding or clapping, use of environment (such as splashing), and wing beating (possible in winged maniraptoran dinosaurs). 

===Reproductive biology===
  (Charadrius).]]

All dinosaurs lay amniotic eggs with hard shells made mostly of calcium carbonate.  Eggs are usually laid in a Bird nest|nest. Most species create somewhat elaborate nests, which can be cups, domes, plates, beds scrapes, mounds, or burrows. Hansell M (2000). Bird Nests and Construction Behaviour. University of Cambridge Press ISBN 0-521-46038-7  Some species of modern bird have no nests; the cliff-nesting Common Guillemot lays its eggs on bare rock, and male Emperor Penguins keep eggs between their body and feet. Primitive birds and many non-avialan dinosaurs often lay eggs in communal nests, with males primarily incubating the eggs. While modern birds have only one functional oviduct and lay one egg at a time, more primitive birds and dinosaurs had two oviducts, like crocodiles. Some non-avialan dinosaurs, such as Troodon, exhibited iterative laying, where the adult might lay a pair of eggs every one or two days, and then ensured simultaneous hatching by delaying brooding until all eggs were laid.   
 marrow of Tyrannosaurus rex skeleton provided evidence of medullary bone in extinct dinosaurs and, for the first time, allowed paleontologists to establish the sex of a fossil dinosaur specimen. Further research has found medullary bone in the carnosaur Allosaurus and the ornithopod Tenontosaurus. Because the line of dinosaurs that includes Allosaurus and Tyrannosaurus diverged from the line that led to Tenontosaurus very early in the evolution of dinosaurs, this suggests that the production of medullary tissue is a general characteristic of all dinosaurs. 

  Citipati, American Museum of Natural History]] Jack Horners oviraptorid Citipati brooding position prosauropod Massospondylus) was found without teeth, indicating that some parental care was required to feed the young dinosaurs.  Trackways have also confirmed parental behavior among ornithopods from the Isle of Skye in northwestern Scotland.  Nests and eggs have been found for most major groups of dinosaurs, and it appears likely that all dinosaurs cared for their young to some extent either before or shortly after hatching.

===Waste===
Like other reptiles, dinosaurs are primarily uricotelic, that is, their kidneys extract nitrogenous wastes from their bloodstream and excrete it as uric acid instead of urea or ammonia via the ureters into the intestine. In most living species, uric acid is excreted along with feces as a semisolid waste.      However, at least some modern birds (such as hummingbirds) can be facultatively ammonotelic , excreting most of the nitrogenous wastes as ammonia.  They also excrete creatine, rather than creatinine like mammals. --> This material, as well as the output of the intestines, emerges from the cloaca.   In addition, many species regurgitate Pellet (ornithology)|pellets, and fossil pellets that may have come from dinosaurs are known from as long ago as the Cretaceous period. 

===Physiology===
 
  of an abelisaur and a bird]] endothermy for all dinosaurs has become the consensus view, and debate has focused on the mechanisms of temperature regulation  .
 Robert T. "Bob" Bakker, an early proponent of dinosaur endothermy, published an influential paper on the topic in 1968. 
 endothermy in Mesozoic dinosaurs includes the discovery of polar dinosaurs in Australia and Antarctica (where they would have experienced a cold, dark six-month winter), and analysis of blood-vessel structures within fossil bones that are typical of endotherms. Scientific debate continues regarding the specific ways in which dinosaur temperature regulation evolved. 

In the saurischian dinosaurs, higher metabolisms were supported by the evolution of the avian respiratory system, characterized by an extensive system of air sacs that extended the lungs and invaded many of the bones in the skeleton, making them hollow.   

Early avian-style respiratory systems with air sacs may have been capable of sustaining higher activity levels than mammals of similar size and build could sustain. In addition to providing a very efficient supply of oxygen, the rapid airflow would have been an effective cooling mechanism, which is essential for animals that are active but too large to get rid of all the excess heat through their skin. {{Cite book |author=Reid, R.E.H. | contribution=Dinosaurian Physiology: the Case for "Intermediate" Dinosaurs |editor=Farlow, J.O., and Brett-Surman, M.K. |title=The Complete Dinosaur |year=1997 |publisher=Indiana University Press |place=Bloomington|isbn=0-253-33349-0 |pages=449–473 |url=http://books.google.com/?id=FOViD-lDPy0C&pg=PA449
}} 

==Origin of birds==
 

The possibility that dinosaurs were the ancestors of birds was first suggested in 1868 by Thomas Henry Huxley.  After the work of Gerhard Heilmann in the early 20th century, the theory of birds as dinosaur descendants was abandoned in favor of the idea of their being descendants of generalized Thecodontia|thecodonts, with the key piece of evidence being the supposed lack of clavicles in dinosaurs.  However, as later discoveries showed, clavicles (or a single fused furcula|wishbone, which derived from separate clavicles) were not actually absent;  they had been found as early as 1924 in Oviraptor, but misidentified as an interclavicle.  In the 1970s, John Ostrom revived the dinosaur–bird theory,  which gained momentum in the coming decades with the advent of cladistic analysis,  and a great increase in the discovery of small theropods and early birds.  Of particular note have been the fossils of the Yixian Formation, where a variety of theropods and early birds have been found, often with feathers of some type.  Birds share over a hundred distinct anatomical features with theropod dinosaurs, which are now generally accepted to have been their closest ancient relatives.  convergent with dinosaurs. 

===Feathers===
 
  lithographica]]

Archaeopteryx was the first fossil found which revealed a potential connection between dinosaurs and birds. It is considered a transitional fossil, in that it displays features of both groups. Brought to light just two years after Darwins seminal The Origin of Species, its discovery spurred the nascent debate between proponents of evolutionary biology and creationism. This early bird is so dinosaur-like that, without a clear impression of feathers in the surrounding rock, at least one specimen was mistaken for Compsognathus. 
 compsognathids like tyrannosauroids (Dilong convergent with dinosaurs.   However, their views have for the most part not been accepted by other researchers, to the point that the question of the scientific nature of Feduccias proposals has been raised. 

===Skeleton=== missing link breast bone. cladistic analysis strengthens the case for the link.

===Soft anatomy=== Aerosteon riocoloradensis]] Aerosteon riocoloradensis, the skeleton of which supplies the strongest evidence to date of a dinosaur with a bird-like breathing system. computed tomography|CT-scanning of Aerosteons fossil bones revealed evidence for the existence of air sacs within the animals body cavity.  

===Behavioral evidence=== troodonts Mei deinonychosaur and oviraptorosaur specimens have also been found preserved on top of their nests, likely brooding in a bird-like manner.    The ratio between egg volume and body mass of adults among these dinosaurs suggest that the eggs were primarily brooded by the male, and that the young were highly precocial, similar to many modern ground-dwelling birds.   

Some dinosaurs are known to have used gizzard stones like modern birds. These stones are swallowed by animals to aid digestion and break down food and hard fibers once they enter the stomach. When found in association with fossils, gizzard stones are called gastroliths. 

==Extinction of major groups==
 

The discovery that birds are a type of dinosaur showed that dinosaurs in general are not, in fact,   approximately 66&nbsp;million years ago. Many other groups of animals also became extinct at this time, including ammonites (nautilus-like mollusks), mosasaurs, plesiosaurs, pterosaurs, and many groups of mammals.  This mass extinction is known as the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event. The nature of the event that caused this mass extinction has been extensively studied since the 1970s; at present, several related theories are supported by paleontologists. Though the consensus is that an impact event was the primary cause of dinosaur extinction, some scientists cite other possible causes, or support the idea that a confluence of several factors was responsible for the sudden disappearance of dinosaurs from the fossil record.

At the peak of the Mesozoic, there were no polar ice caps, and sea levels are estimated to have been from 100 to 250&nbsp;meters (300 to 800&nbsp;ft) higher than they are today. The planets temperature was also much more uniform, with only 25&nbsp;°C (45&nbsp;°F) separating average polar temperatures from those at the equator. On average, atmospheric temperatures were also much higher; the poles, for example, were 50&nbsp;°C (90&nbsp;°F) warmer than today.  

The atmospheres composition during the Mesozoic is a matter for debate. While some academics argue that oxygen levels were much higher than today, others argue that biological adaptations seen in birds and dinosaurs indicate that respiratory systems evolved beyond what would be necessary if oxygen levels were high.  By the late Cretaceous, the environment was changing dramatically. Volcanic activity was decreasing, which led to a cooling trend as levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide dropped. Oxygen levels in the atmosphere also started to fluctuate and would ultimately fall considerably. Some scientists hypothesize that climate change, combined with lower oxygen levels, might have led directly to the demise of many species. If the dinosaurs had respiratory systems similar to those commonly found in modern birds, it may have been particularly difficult for them to cope with reduced respiratory efficiency, given the enormous oxygen demands of their very large bodies. 

===Impact event===
 
  at the tip of the Yucatán Peninsula; the impactor that formed this crater may have caused the dinosaur extinction.]]
The asteroid collision theory, which was brought to wide attention in 1980 by Walter Alvarez and colleagues, links the extinction event at the end of the Cretaceous period to a bolide impact approximately 65&nbsp;million years ago. Alvarez et al. proposed that a sudden increase in iridium levels, recorded around the world in the periods rock stratum, was direct evidence of the impact.  The bulk of the evidence now suggests that a bolide 5 to 15&nbsp;kilometers (3 to 9&nbsp;mi) wide hit in the vicinity of the Yucatán Peninsula (in southeastern Mexico), creating the approximately   Chicxulub Crater and triggering the mass extinction.   Scientists are not certain whether dinosaurs were thriving or declining before the impact event. Some scientists propose that the meteorite caused a long and unnatural drop in Earths atmospheric temperature, while others claim that it would have instead created an unusual heat wave. The consensus among scientists who support this theory is that the impact caused extinctions both directly (by heat from the meteorite impact) and also indirectly (via a worldwide cooling brought about when matter ejected from the impact crater reflected thermal radiation from the sun). Although the speed of extinction cannot be deduced from the fossil record alone, various models suggest that the extinction was extremely rapid, being down to hours rather than years. 
 Czech scientists used computer simulations to identify the probable source of the Chicxulub impact. They calculated a 90% probability that an asteroid named Baptistina, approximately   in diameter, orbiting in the asteroid belt which lies between Mars and Jupiter, was struck by a smaller unnamed asteroid about 55&nbsp;km (35&nbsp;mi) in diameter about 160&nbsp;million years ago. The impact shattered Baptistina, creating a cluster which still exists today as the Baptistina family. Calculations indicate that some of the fragments were sent hurtling into earth-crossing orbits, one of which was the   wide meteorite which struck Mexicos Yucatan peninsula at the end of the Cretaceous, creating the Chicxulub crater.  In 2011, new data from the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer revised the date of the collision which created the Baptistina family to about 80 million years ago. This makes an asteroid from this family highly improbable to be the asteroid that created the Chicxulub Crater, as typically the process of resonance and collision of an asteroid takes many tens of millions of years.   
 Nemesis through Oort comet cloud would trigger comet showers."  One or more of these comets then collided with the Earth at approximately the same time, causing the worldwide extinction. As with the impact of a single asteroid, the end result of this comet bombardment would have been a sudden drop in global temperatures, followed by a protracted cool period. 

===Deccan Traps=== 
 
 million years ago and lasted for over 2 million years. However, there is evidence that two thirds of the Deccan Traps were created in only 1 million years about 65.5&nbsp;million years ago, and so these eruptions would have caused a fairly rapid extinction, possibly over a period of thousands of years, but still longer than would be expected from a single impact event.  
 impact  ."  
 Luis Alvarez sparse data. While his assertion was not initially well-received, later intensive field studies of fossil beds lent weight to his claim. Eventually, most paleontologists began to accept the idea that the mass extinctions at the end of the Cretaceous were largely or at least partly due to a massive Earth impact. However, even Walter Alvarez has acknowledged that there were other major changes on Earth even before the impact, such as a drop in sea level and massive volcanic eruptions that produced the Indian Deccan Traps, and these may have contributed to the extinctions. 

===Possible Paleocene survivors===
  hadrosaur leg-bone fossil in the San Juan Basin, New Mexico, and described it as evidence of Paleocene dinosaurs. The formation in which the bone was discovered has been dated to the early Paleocene epoch, approximately 64.5 million years ago. If the bone was not re-deposited into that stratum by weathering action, it would provide evidence that some dinosaur populations may have survived at least a half million years into the Cenozoic Era.  Other evidence includes the finding of dinosaur remains in the Hell Creek Formation up to 1.3&nbsp;meters (51&nbsp;in) above ( &nbsp;years later than) the Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary. Similar reports have come from other parts of the world, including China.  Many scientists, however, dismissed the supposed Paleocene dinosaurs as re-worked, that is, washed out of their original locations and then re-buried in much later sediments.   However, direct dating of the bones themselves has supported the later date, with U–Pb dating methods resulting in a precise age of 64.8 ± 0.9 million years ago.  If correct, the presence of a handful of dinosaurs in the early Paleocene would not change the underlying facts of the extinction. 

==History of study==
  dragon bones giants and Great Flood.
 , a dinosaur he described and named in 1877.]] Chipping Norton, giant human Rutellum implicatum",   that had been found in Caswell, near Witney, Oxfordshire. 

 ]]
Between 1815 and 1824, the Rev  s. He published his findings in 1825.  
 Queen Victoria, Owen established the Natural History Museum in South Kensington, London, to display the national collection of dinosaur fossils and other biological and geological exhibits.

In 1858, the first known American dinosaur was discovered, in   was in 1834, in Maidstone, Kent, England), and it was clearly a bipedal creature. This was a revolutionary discovery as, until that point, most scientists had believed dinosaurs walked on four feet, like other lizards. Foulkes discoveries sparked a wave of dinosaur mania in the United States.

