
 
  ""      ?
      2 .     .
[Hide]
Eagle
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the bird. For other uses, see Eagle (disambiguation).


Golden Eagle
Eagle is a common name for some members of the bird family Accipitridae; it belongs to several genera that are not necessarily closely related to each other. Most of the more than sixty species of eagles occur in Eurasia and Africa.[1] Outside this area, just eleven species can be found  two species (the Bald Eagle and Golden Eagle) in the United States and Canada, nine species in Central America and South America, and three species in Australia.
Contents  [hide] 
1 Description
2 Species
2.1 Family
3 Eagles in culture
3.1 Etymology
3.2 Religion
3.3 As national symbols
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links
Description [edit]



Eagles are large, powerfully built birds of prey, with a heavy head and beak. Even the smallest eagles, like the Booted Eagle (Aquila pennata) (which is comparable in size to a Common Buzzard (Buteo buteo) or Red-tailed Hawk (B. jamaicensis)), have relatively longer and more evenly broad wings, and more direct, faster flight  despite the reduced size of aerodynamic feathers. Most eagles are larger than any other raptors apart from some vultures. The smallest species of eagle is the South Nicobar Serpent Eagle (Spilornis klossi), at 450 g (1 lb) and 40 cm (16 in). The largest species are discussed below. Like all birds of prey, eagles have very large hooked beaks for tearing flesh from their prey, strong muscular legs, and powerful talons. The beak is typically heavier than most other birds of prey. Eagles' eyes are extremely powerful, having up to 3.6 times human acuity for the martial eagle, which enables them to spot potential prey from a very long distance.[2] This keen eyesight is primarily contributed by their extremely large pupils which ensure minimal diffraction (scattering) of the incoming light. The female of all species of eagle known is larger than the male.[3][4]
Eagles normally build their nests, called eyries, in tall trees or on high cliffs. Many species lay two eggs, but the older, larger chick frequently kills its younger sibling once it has hatched. The dominant chick tends to be the female, as they are bigger than the male. The parents take no action to stop the killing.[5][6]
Due to the size and power of many eagle species, they are ranked at the top of the food chain as apex predators amongst the avian world. The type of prey varies from genus to genus. The Haliaeetus and Ichthyophaga eagles prefer to capture fish, though the species in the former often capture various animals, especially other water birds, and are powerful kleptoparasites of other birds. The snake and serpent eagles of the genera Circaetus, Terathopius and Spilornis predominantly prey on the great diversity of snakes that are found in the tropics of Africa and Asia. The eagles of the genus Aquila are often the top birds of prey in open habitats, taking almost any medium-sized vertebrate they can catch. Where Aquila eagles are absent, other eagles, such as the buteonine Black-chested Buzzard-Eagle of South America, may assume the position of top raptorial predator in open areas. Many other eagles, including the species-rich Spizaetus genus, live predominantly in woodlands and forest. These eagles often target various arboreal or ground-dwelling mammals and birds, which are often unsuspectingly ambushed in such dense, knotty environments. Hunting techniques differ among the species and genera, with some individual eagles having engaged in quite varied techniques based their environment and prey at any given time. Most eagles grab prey without landing and take flight with it so the prey can be carried to a perch and torn apart.[7] The Bald Eagle is noted for having flown with the heaviest load verified to be carried by any flying bird, since one eagle flew with a 6.8 kg (15 lb) mule deer fawn.[8] However, a few eagles may target prey considerably heavier than themselves; such prey is too heavy to fly with and thus it is either eaten at the site of the kill or taken in pieces back to a perch or nest. Golden and Crowned Eagles have killed ungulates weighing up to 30 kg (66 lb) and a Martial Eagle even killed a 37 kg (82 lb) duiker, 78 times heavier than the predating eagle.[7][9] Authors on birds David Allen Sibley, Pete Dunne and Clay Sutton, described the behavioral difference between hunting eagles and other birds of prey thus (in this case the Bald and Golden Eagles as compared to other North American raptors):[10]
They have at least one singular characteristic. It has been observed that most birds of prey look back over their shoulders before striking prey (or shortly thereafter); predation is after all a two-edged sword. All hawks seem to have this habit, from the smallest kestrel to the largest Ferruginous  but not the Eagles.
Among the eagles are some of the largest birds of prey: only the condors and some of the Old World vultures are markedly larger. It is regularly debated which should be considered the largest species of eagle. They could be measured variously in total length, body mass or wingspan. Different lifestyle needs among various eagles result in variable measurements from species to species. For example, many forest-dwelling eagles, including the very large Harpy and Philippine Eagles, have relatively short wingspans, a feature necessary for being able to maneuver in quick, short bursts through dense forested habitats.[7] On the other hand, eagles in the genus Aquila are found almost strictly in open country, are superlative soarers, and have relatively long wings for their size.[7]
Here are lists of the top five eagles going on weight, length and, lastly, wingspan. Unless otherwise noted via reference, the figures listed are the median reported for each measurement in the guide Raptors of the World (Ferguson-Lees, et al.), in which only measurements that could be personally verified by the authors were listed.[7]
Rank	Common Name	Scientific Name	Body Mass
1	Steller's Sea Eagle	Haliaeetus pelagicus	6.7 kilograms (15 lb)
2	Philippine Eagle	Pithecophaga jefferyi	6.35 kg (14.0 lb)
3	Harpy Eagle	Harpia harpyja	5.95 kg (13.1 lb)
4	White-tailed Eagle	Haliaeetus albicilla	4.8 kg (11 lb)[11]
5	Martial Eagle	Polemaetus bellicosus	4.6 kg (10 lb)[11]
Rank	Common Name	Scientific Name	Total Length
1	Philippine Eagle	Pithecophaga jefferyi	100 cm (3 ft 3 in)[12]
2	Harpy Eagle	Harpia harpyja	95.5 cm (3 ft 2 in)
3	Wedge-tailed Eagle	Aquila audax	95.5 cm (3 ft 2 in)
4	Steller's Sea Eagle	Haliaeetus pelagicus	95 cm (3 ft 1 in)
5	Crowned Eagle	Stephanoaetus coronatus	87.5 cm (2 ft 10 in)
Rank	Common Name	Scientific Name	Median Wingspan
1	White-tailed Eagle	Haliaeetus albicilla	218.5 cm (7 ft 2 in)
2	Steller's Sea Eagle	Haliaeetus pelagicus	212.5 cm (7 ft 0 in)
3	Wedge-tailed Eagle	Aquila audax	210 cm (6 ft 11 in)[13][14]
4	Golden Eagle	Aquila chrysaetos	207 cm (6 ft 9 in)
5	Martial Eagle	Polemaetus bellicosus	206.5 cm (6 ft 9 in)
Species [edit]



Martial Eagle in Namibia


Philippine Eagle, Pithecophaga jefferyi in Southern Philippines


Wedge Tailed Eagle in Australia
Major new research into eagle taxonomy suggests that the important genera Aquila and Hieraaetus are not composed of nearest relatives, and it is likely that a reclassification of these genera will soon take place, with some species being moved to Lophaetus or Ictinaetus.[15]
Bonelli's Eagle, and the Booted Eagle have been moved from Hieraaetus to Aquila.
Either the Greater Spotted Eagle and Lesser Spotted Eagle should move from Aquila to join the Long-crested Eagle in Lophaetus, or, perhaps better, all three of these species should move to Ictinaetus with the Black Eagle.
The Steppe Eagle and Tawny Eagle, once thought to be conspecific, are not even each other's nearest relatives.
Family [edit]
Main article: Accipitridae
Subfamily Buteoninae  hawks (buzzards), true eagles and seaeagles
Genus Geranoaetus
Black-chested Buzzard-Eagle, Geranoaetus melanoleucus
Genus Harpyhaliaetus
Crowned Solitary Eagle, Harpyhaliaetus coronatus
Montane Solitary Eagle, H. solitarius
Genus Morphnus
Crested Eagle, Morphnus guianensis
Genus Harpia
Harpy Eagle, Harpia harpyja
Genus Pithecophaga
Philippine Eagle, Pithecophaga jefferyi
Genus Harpyopsis
Papuan Eagle, Harpyopsis novaeguineae
Genus Oroaetus
Black-and-chestnut Eagle, Oroaetus isidori
Genus Spizaetus
Crested Hawk-Eagle, Spizaetus cirrhatus
Mountain Hawk-Eagle, S. nipalensis
Blyth's Hawk-Eagle, S. alboniger
Javan Hawk-Eagle, S. bartelsi
Sulawesi Hawk-Eagle, S. lanceolatus
Philippine Hawk-Eagle, S. philippensis
Wallace's Hawk-Eagle, S. nanus
Black Hawk-Eagle, S. tyrannus
Ornate Hawk-Eagle, S. ornatus
Black-and-white Hawk-Eagle, S. melanoleucus
Genus Lophaetus
Long-crested Eagle, Lophaetus occipitalis  possibly belongs in Ictinaetus
Genus Stephanoaetus
Crowned Eagle, Stephanoaetus coronatus
Genus Polemaetus
Martial Eagle, Polemaetus bellicosus
Genus Hieraaetus
Ayres' Hawk-eagle, Hieraaetus ayresii
African Hawk-Eagle, H. spilogaster
Little Eagle, H. morphnoides
Pygmy Eagle, H. m. weiskei
Genus Harpagornis (extinct)
Haast's Eagle, Harpagornis moorei  possibly belongs in either Hieraaetus or Aquila[16]
Genus Lophotriorchis
Rufous-bellied Hawk-Eagle, L. kienerii


A Steppe Eagle in Lahore Zoo, Pakistan
Genus Aquila
Bonelli's Eagle, Aquila fasciata  formerly in Hieraaetus fasciatus
Cassin's Hawk-Eagle, A. africana  formerly in Hieraaetus or Spizaetus genera
Booted Eagle, A. pennata  formerly Hieraaetus pennatus
Golden Eagle, A. chrysaetos
Eastern Imperial Eagle, A. heliaca
Spanish Imperial Eagle A. adalberti
Steppe Eagle, A. nipalensis
Tawny Eagle, A. rapax
Greater Spotted Eagle, A. clanga  to be moved to Lophaetus or Ictinaetus
Lesser Spotted Eagle, A. pomarina  to be moved to Lophaetus or Ictinaetus
Indian Spotted Eagle, A. hastata  to be moved to Lophaetus or Ictinaetus
Verreaux's Eagle, A. verreauxii
Gurney's Eagle, A. gurneyi
Wahlberg's Eagle, A. wahlbergi
Wedge-tailed Eagle, A. audax
Genus Ictinaetus
Black Eagle, Ictinaetus malayensis
Genus Haliaeetus
White-tailed Eagle, Haliaeetus albicilla
Bald Eagle, H. leucocephalus
Steller's Sea Eagle, H. pelagicus
African Fish Eagle, H. vocifer
White-bellied Sea Eagle, H. leucogaster
Sanford's Sea Eagle, H. sanfordi
Madagascar Fish Eagle, H. vociferoides
Pallas' Sea Eagle, H. leucoryphus
Genus Ichthyophaga
Lesser Fish Eagle, Ichthyophaga humilis
Grey-headed Fish Eagle, I. ichthyaetus


Short-toed Snake Eagle in flight
Subfamily Circaetinae: snake-eagles
Genus Terathopius
Bateleur, Terathopius ecaudatus
Genus Circaetus
Short-toed Snake Eagle, Circaetus gallicus
Black-chested Snake Eagle, C. pectoralis
Brown Snake Eagle, C. cinereus
Fasciated Snake Eagle, C. fasciolatus
Western Banded Snake Eagle, C. cinerascens
Genus Spilornis
Crested Serpent Eagle, Spilornis cheela
Central Nicobar Serpent Eagle, S. minimus (subspecies or species)
Great Nicobar Serpent Eagle, S. klossi
Mountain Serpent Eagle, S. kinabaluensis
Sulawesi Serpent Eagle, S. rufipectus
Philippine Serpent Eagle, S. holospilus
Andaman Serpent Eagle, S. elgini
Genus Eutriorchis
Madagascar Serpent Eagle, Eutriorchis astur
Eagles in culture [edit]

Etymology [edit]
The modern English term for the bird is derived from Latin: aquila by way of French: aigle. The origin of aquila is unknown, but it is believed to possibly derive from either aquilus (meaning dark-colored, swarthy, or blackish) as a reference to the plumage of eagles or from aquilo (meaning north wind).
Old English used the term earn, related to Scandinavia's rn / rn. It is similar to other Indo-European terms for "bird" or "eagle", including Greek:  (orns), Russian:  (orl), and Welsh: eryr. The Albanian word for eagle is shqiponj, deriving from the root shqipe.
In Britain before 1678, eagle referred specifically to the Golden Eagle, with the other native species, the White-tailed Eagle, being known as erne. The modern name "Golden Eagle" for aquila chrysaetos was introduced by naturalist John Ray.[citation needed]
Religion [edit]


Garuda, the Vahana of Lord Vishnu, depicted with an eagle's beak and wings
The Moche people of ancient Peru worshiped the animal and often depicted eagles in their art.[17]
Despite modern and historic Native American practices of giving eagle feathers to non-indigenous people and also members of other tribes who have been deemed worthy, current United States eagle feather law stipulates that only individuals of certifiable Native American ancestry enrolled in a federally recognized tribe are legally authorized to obtain eagle feathers for religious or spiritual reasons.[18] In Canada, poaching of eagle feathers for the booming U.S. market has sometimes resulted in the arrests of First Nations person for the crime.[19]
In Hindu religion, Garuda is a lesser Hindu divinity, usually the mount (vahanam) of Vishnu. Garuda is depicted as having the golden body of a strong man with a white face, red wings, and an eagle's beak and with a crown on his head. This ancient deity was said to be massive, large enough to block out the sun.
The eagle is also the patron animal of Zeus. In particular, Zeus was said to have taken the form of an eagle in order to abduct Ganymede, and there are numerous artistic depictions of the Eagle Zeus bearing Ganymede aloft, from Classical times up to the present (see illustrations in the Ganymede (mythology) page.)
The Eagle is also the symbol of Libby, Montana which was recently named "The City of Eagles"[20][21]
As national symbols [edit]
See also: Eagles in heraldry

This section is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this section to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (February 2012)


The coat of arms of Mexico  a golden eagle perched upon a cactus eating a snake


The coat of arms of Austria  a black eagle holding a hammer and a sickle, with a broken chain between its legs
Eagles have been used by many nations as a national symbol.
The coat of arms of Albania has a black double-headed eagle. Furthermore the eagle gives Albania its name ( in Albanian Shqiperia meaning Land of the eagles) and Albanians call themselves shqipetar or shqipe meaning eagles.
The coat of arms of Armenia has a gold eagle and lion.
The coat of arms of Austria has a black eagle.
The coat of arms of the Czech Republic integrates the symbols of Moravia and Silesia (both with female eagles in their emblems  red-and-white chequered and black respectively) on the coat of arms of the Czech Republic with Bohemia's lion.
The coat of arms of Egypt is a golden eagle looking towards the viewer's left. It is taking from the golden Eagle of Saladin founded on Saladin Citadel of Cairo.
The coat of arms of Germany has a black eagle.
The coat of arms of Ghana has two golden eagles holding it.
The coat of arms of Iceland has an eagle holding it, as well as a dragon, a bull and a giant.
The coat of arms of Indonesia has an eagle-like garuda carrying a shield on its neck and a banner on its feet.
The coat of arms of Iraq has the golden Eagle of Saladin.
The coat of arms of Mexico has a golden eagle perched upon a cactus devouring a snake.
The coat of arms of Moldova consists of a stylized eagle holding a cross in its beak and a sceptre and a branch in its claws.
The coat of arms of Montenegro represents the two-headed eagle in flight.
The coat of arms of Navarre/Basque Country Kingdom has a black eagle.
The coat of arms of Nigeria has a red eagle on top.
The coat of arms of Palestine has the golden Eagle of Saladin.
The coat of arms of Panama has a harpy eagle.
The coat of arms of the Philippines has the bald eagle of the United States as a symbol of its colonial past, but the Monkey-eating Eagle is the de jure National Bird of the country.
The coat of arms of Poland has a white eagle with a golden beak and talons wearing a golden crown.
The coat of arms of Romania has a golden aquila holding a cross in its beak and a mace and a sword in its claws.
The coat of arms of Russia has a gold double-headed eagle.
The coat of arms of Serbia has a white bicephalic eagle of the House of Nemanji.
The coat of arms of Syria formerly had the eagle of Saladin.
The Great Seal of the United States has a bald eagle.
The coat of arms of Yemen depicts a golden eagle with a scroll between its claws.
The coat of arms of Zambia has an orange red eagle on top.
The Polish and the Serbian eagles are distinguished by their white color.
Historic uses:
The Ptolemaic rulers of Egypt used it as their seal.
Napoleon I used the Roman Golden Eagle as the symbol of his new French empire.
Persian Empire: the symbol of Persian Army was an Eagle.
The Romans used it on the standards of their armies. From this derives:
The late Byzantine Empire chose a two-headed golden eagle as its symbol. It is popularly that one head symbolised ancient Rome, and the other head symbolized "new Rome" at Constantinople. From this derives:
The two-headed eagle is the emblem of "Shqipria" or Land of the Eagles, which is known in English as Albania (see The Tale of the Eagle for the legendary origin of the name).
After the fall of Constantinople, the Russian Empire took the two-headed eagle as its own symbol.
After his crowning as the new Roman Emperor, Charlemagne adopted the ancient Roman eagle as his own symbol. The Holy Roman Empire born of his kingdom took the eagle, but the Habsburgs replaced the golden eagle by an imperial eagle. From this derives:
The Austrian Empire had a two-headed eagle as its symbol. After the abolition of Austria-Hungary, Austria took as its symbol a one-headed eagle in the modern coat of arms of Austria.
Prussia, and later Germany have used a black eagle as their national symbol.
The Spanish Catholic monarchs, Isabella and Ferdinand, used the eagle as a part of the royal shield representing Saint John the Evangelist. The eagle was again on the Spanish shield under the Francoist regime and the transition to Democracy (19391981).
The Seljuk Turks and Ottoman Turks used a double-headed eagle as coats-of-arms.
During the 1930s and 1940s Hitler's Nazi Germany used a black eagle with its wings outstretched and clutching a swastika as its insignia.
References [edit]

^ del Hoyo, J.; Elliot, A. & Sargatal, J. (editors). (1994). Handbook of the Birds of the World Volume 2: New World Vultures to Guineafowl. Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-15-6
^ Shlaer, Robert (1972). "An Eagle's Eye: Quality of the Retinal Image". Science 176 (4037): 920922. doi:10.1126/science.176.4037.920. PMID 5033635. Retrieved 2012-04-16.
^ Leclerc, Georges Louis, Comte de Buffon (2010). The Natural History of Birds: From the French of the Count de Buffon; Illustrated with Engravings, and a Preface, Notes, and Additions, by the Translator. Cambridge University Press. pp. 60. ISBN 978-1-108-02298-9.
^ Grambo, Rebecca L. (2003). Eagles. Voyageur Press. ISBN 978-0-89658-363-4.
^ Grambo, Rebecca L (2003). Eagles. Voyageur Press. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-89658-363-4.
^ Stinson, Christopher H (1979). "On the Selective Advantage of Fratricide in Raptors". Evolution 33 (4): 12191225. doi:10.2307/2407480.
^ a b c d e Ferguson-Lees, J.; Christie, D. (2001). Raptors of the World. London: Christopher Helm. ISBN 0-7136-8026-1.
^ "Amazing Bird Records". Trails.com. Retrieved 2012-07-20.
^ Watson, Jeff (2011). The Golden Eagle: Second Edition. ISBN 978-0-30017-019-1.
^ Sutton, C.; Dunne, P.; Sibley, D. (1989). Hawks in Flight: The Flight Identification of North American Migrant Raptors. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 0-3955-1022-8.
^ a b del Hoyo, J; Elliot, A; Sargatal, J (1996). Handbook of the Birds of the World 3. Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-20-2.
^ Gamauf, A., Preleuthner, M., and Winkler, H. (1998). "Philippine Birds of Prey: Interrelations among habitat, morphology and behavior". The Auk 115 (3): 713726. doi:10.2307/4089419.
^ Morgan, A.M. "The spread and weight of the Wedge-tailed Eagle". South Australian Ornithologist 11: 156157.
^ Wood, Gerald (1983). The Guinness Book of Animal Facts and Feats. ISBN 978-0-85112-235-9.
^ Lerner, H. R. L.; Mindell, D. P. (2005). "Phylogeny of eagles, Old World vultures, and other Accipitridae based on nuclear and mitochondrial DNA". Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 37 (2): 327346. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2005.04.010. PMID 15925523.
^ Bunce, M.; et al. (2005). "Ancient DNA Provides New Insights into the Evolutionary History of New Zealand's Extinct Giant Eagle". PLoS Biol 3 (1): e9. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030009. PMC 539324. PMID 15660162.
^ Larco Herrera, Rafael and Berrin, Kathleen (1997) The Spirit of Ancient Peru Thames and Hudson, New York, ISBN 0500018022
^ Office of Law Enforcement. "National Eagle Repository". Mountain-Prairie Region. United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Archived from the original on 2007-10-10. Retrieved 2007-11-20.
^ Sin, Lena (2006-04-30). "Charges laid in eagle-poaching case". The Province (CanWest MediaWorks Publications Inc.). Retrieved 2007-11-20.
^ Berget, Todd. "Custom Iron Eagles".
^ Libby, Montana: City of Eagles. Roadsideamerica.com. Retrieved on 2013-03-02.
Further reading [edit]

Collinson, Martin. Splitting headaches? Recent taxonomic changes affecting the British and Western Palaearctic lists British Birds vol 99 (June 2006), 306323
External links [edit]

	Look up eagle in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
	Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Eagles
	Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica article Eagle.
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Eagles
PBS Nature: Eagles
PBS Video Episode: American Eagle
Eagle photos on Oriental Bird Images
Eagle videos on the Internet Bird Collection
Web of the Conservation Biology Team-Bonelli's Eagle, of the University of Barcelona
Decorah Eagles: 24/7 Live Webcam from The Raptor Resource Project
EagleCAM: White-bellied Sea Eagles Live Webcam at Discovery Centre in Sydney, Australia
[show] v t e
Subfamily: Buteoninae
Categories: AccipitridaeEaglesNational symbols of ArmeniaNational symbols of AustriaNational symbols of the Czech RepublicNational symbols of EgyptNational symbols of GermanyNational symbols of GhanaNational symbols of IraqNational symbols of LiechtensteinNational symbols of MexicoNational symbols of NigeriaNational symbols of PolandNational symbols of RomaniaNational symbols of SerbiaNational symbols of SpainNational symbols of SyriaNational symbols of YemenNational symbols of Zambia
Navigation menu
Create accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView history

Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Toolbox
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Print/export
Languages
Afrikaans
nglisc

Aragons
Asturianu
Aymar aru

Bn-lm-g



Bosanski
Brezhoneg

Catal

esky
ChiShona
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deitsch
Deutsch
Din bizaad
Eesti


Espaol
Esperanto
Euskara

Froyskt
Franais
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gidhlig
Galego
Hak-k-fa

Hausa


Hrvatski
Ido
Bahasa Indonesia

Basa Jawa
Kapampangan

Kirundi
Kiswahili
Kreyl ayisyen


Latina
Latvieu
Lietuvi
Magyar



Bahasa Melayu


Nhuatl
Nederlands

 

Nordfriisk
Norsk bokml
Norsk nynorsk


Picard
Plattdtsch
Polski
Portugus
Romn

Scots
Shqip
Simple English
 / 
Soomaaliga
 / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / 
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog




Tsetshesthese
Trke



Ting Vit
Vro


Edit links
This page was last modified on 13 May 2013 at 20:32.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaMobile view 