 
 
  
 
{{Taxobox
| name = Elephants
| image =African Bush Elephant-crop.jpg
| image_caption = African elephant in Mikumi National Park, Tanzania
| fossil_range =  
| regnum = Animalia Chordata
| Vertebrata
| Mammal
| superordo = Afrotheria
| ordo = Proboscidea
| familia = Elephantidae
| familia_authority = John Edward Gray|Gray, 1821
| subdivision_ranks = Genera
| subdivision ={{plainlist|
* African elephant|Loxodonta
* Elephas}}
}}
 South and Southeast Asia. They are the only surviving proboscideans; extinct species include mammoths and mastodons. The largest living terrestrial animals, male African elephants can reach a height of   and weigh  . These animals have several distinctive features, including a long proboscis or trunk used for many purposes, particularly for grasping objects. Their incisors grow into tusks, which serve as tools for moving objects and digging and as weapons for fighting. The elephants large ear flaps help to control the temperature of its body. African elephants have larger ears and concave backs while Asian elephants have smaller ears and convex or level backs.
 dogs usually dominance and reproductive success. Calves are the centre of attention in their family groups and rely on their mothers for as long as three years. Elephants can live up to 70 years in the wild. They communicate by touch, sight, and sound; elephants use infrasound, and seismic communication over long distances. Elephant intelligence has been compared with that of primates and cetaceans. They appear to have self-awareness and show empathy for dying or dead individuals of their kind.
 vulnerable by poached for their ivory tusks. Other threats to wild elephants include habitat destruction and conflicts with local people. Elephants are used as working animals in Asia. In the past they were used in war; today, they are often put on display in zoos and circuses. Elephants are highly recognisable and have been featured in art, folklore, religion, literature and popular culture.

==Etymology== Latinised form Greek  Swahili elephants are known as Ndovu or Tembo. In Sanskrit the elephant is called Hastin,  while in Hindi it is known as Hathi ().  African elephant|Loxodonta, the generic name for the African elephants, is Greek for "oblique-sided tooth". 

==Taxonomy==
=== Classification, species and subspecies ===
 
 , India]]
  depigmentation on its skin. Shoshani, pp. 3841. 
 described the binomial Elephas trinomial Elephas type an National Geographic. separated from Sultan of Sulu from Java, where elephants are now extinct. 

 , Gabon]] romanised the bush elephant forest elephant western and taxonomic designations synonym of L.&nbsp;africana.   Some evidence suggests that elephants of western Africa are a separate species,  although this is disputed.   The pygmy elephants of the Congo Basin, which have been suggested to be a separate species (Loxodonta pumilio) are probably forest elephants whose small size and/or early maturity are due to environmental conditions. 

===Evolution and extinct relatives===
 , Paris]] evolutionary radiations anthracobunids from Eritreum melakeghebrekristosi deinotheres and the Mammutidae|mammutids. The former were related to Barytherium,  lived in Africa and Eurasia, Sukumar, pp. 1619.  while the latter may have descended from Eritreum  and spread to North America. 
 Primelephas gomphotheroides American mastodon. 
 , Victoria, British Columbia]] killed off 50% of genera weighing over   worldwide. 
 centre of canines decreased. testes of the males. 
 mitochondrial genome Morphological evidence sister taxa, protein albumin cloned mammoth embryo could one day be implanted in an Asian elephants womb. 

====Dwarf species====
 
  gigantism in these conditions. Dwarf proboscideans are known to have lived in Indonesia, the Channel Islands of California, and several islands of the Mediterranean Sea|Mediterranean. 
 Elephas falconeri Channel Islands and evolved into the pygmy mammoth. This species reached a height of   and weighed  . A population of small woolly mammoths survived on Wrangel Island as recently as 4,000 years ago.  After their discovery in 1993, they were considered dwarf mammoths.    This classification has been re-evaluated and since the Second International Mammoth Conference in 1999, these animals are no longer considered to be true "dwarf mammoths". 

==Anatomy and morphology==
 
Elephants are the largest living terrestrial animals. African elephants stand   and weigh   while Asian elephants stand   and weigh  .  In both cases, males are larger than females.   Among African elephants, the forest form is smaller than the savannah form.  The skeleton of the elephant is made up of 326351 bones.  The vertebrae are connected by tight joints, which limit the backbones flexibility. African elephants have 21 pairs of ribs, while Asian elephants have 19 or 20 pairs. {{cite web|author=Somgrid, C.|title=Elephant Anatomy and Biology: Skeletal system|publisher=Elephant Research and Education Center, Department of Companion Animal and Wildlife Clinics, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Chiang Mai University
|url=http://www.asianelephantresearch.com/about-elephant-anatomy-and-biology-p1.php#skeleton|accessdate=21 September 2012}} 
 field of dichromats  and they can see well in dim light but not in bright light.  The body temperature averages 35.9C (97F), similar to a human. Like a camel, an elephant can raise or lower its temperature a few degrees from the average in response to extreme environmental conditions. 

===Ears===
 
Elephant ears have thick bases with thin tips. The ear flaps, or pinna (anatomy)|pinnae, contain numerous blood vessels called capillary|capillaries. Warm blood flows into the capillaries, helping to release excess body heat into the environment. This occurs when the pinnae are still, and the animal can enhance the effect by flapping them. Larger ear surfaces contain more capillaries, and more heat can be released. Of all the elephants, African bush elephants live in the hottest climates, and have the largest ear flaps.  Elephants are capable of hearing at low frequencies and are most sensitive at 1 Hertz|kHz. 

===Trunk=== maxillary and facial nerves  runs along both sides of the trunk. 
 
Elephant trunks have multiple functions, including breathing,  . 
 peripheral nerves and muscles beginning at the tip.   

===Teeth===
  deciduous premolars, grow baby teeth and then replace them with a single permanent set of adult teeth, elephants have cycles of tooth rotation throughout their lives. The chewing teeth are replaced six times in a typical elephants lifetime. Teeth are not replaced by new ones emerging from the jaws vertically as in most mammals. Instead, new teeth grow in at the back of the mouth and move forward to push out the old ones, similar to a conveyor belt. The first chewing tooth on each side of the jaw falls out when the elephant is two to three years old. The second set of chewing teeth falls out when the elephant is four to six years old. The third set is lost at 915 years of age, and set four lasts until 1828 years of age. The fifth set of teeth lasts until the elephant is in its early 40s. The sixth (and usually final) set must last the elephant the rest of its life. Elephant teeth have loop-shaped dental ridges, which are thicker and more diamond-shaped in African elephants. Shoshani, pp. 7071. 

====Tusks====
  enamel cap pulp and some have nerves stretching to the tip. As such it would be difficult to remove it without harming the animal. When removed, ivory begins to dry up and crack if not kept cool and moist. Tusks serve multiple purposes. They are used for digging for water, salt, and roots; debarking or marking trees; and for moving trees and branches when clearing a path. When fighting, they are used to attack and defend, and to protect the trunk. 

Like humans, who are typically Handedness|right- or left-handed, elephants are usually right- or left-tusked. The dominant tusk, called the master tusk, is generally more worn down, as it is shorter with a rounder tip. For the African elephants, tusks are present in both males and females, and are around the same length in both sexes, reaching up to  ,  but those of males tend to be thicker.  In the Asian species, only the males have large tusks. Female Asians have very small ones, or none at all. Shoshani, pp. 7174.  Tuskless males exist and are particularly common among Sri Lankan elephants.  Asian males can have tusks as long as Africans, but they are usually slimmer and lighter; the largest recorded was   long and weighed  . Hunting for elephant ivory in Africa  and Asia  has led to natural selection for shorter tusks. 

===Skin===
  genitals and the areas around the eyes and ear openings. Normally the skin of an Asian elephant is covered with more hair than its African counterpart. Shoshani, pp. 6667. 

An elephant uses mud as a sunscreen, protecting its skin from ultraviolet light. Although tough, an elephants skin is very sensitive. Without regular mud baths to protect it from burning, insect bites and moisture loss, an elephants skin suffers serious damage. After bathing, the elephant will usually use its trunk to blow dust onto its body and this dries into a protective crust. Elephants have difficulty releasing heat through the skin because of their low surface-area-to-volume ratio, which is many times smaller than that of a human. They have even been observed lifting up their legs, presumably in an effort to expose their soles to the air. 

===Legs, locomotion and posture===
  medullary cavities. radius are pronator quadratus pronator teres manus or Pes (anatomy)|pes, which distribute the weight of the animal.  They appear to have a Sesamoid bone|sesamoid, an extra "toe" similar in placement to a giant pandas extra "thumb", that also helps in weight distribution.  As many as five toenails can be found on both the front and hind feet. 
 quadrupeds are well into a gallop, even accounting for leg length. Spring-like kinetics could explain the difference between the motion of elephants and other animals.  During locomotion, the cushion pads expand and contract, and reduce both the pain and noise that would come from a very heavy animal moving.  Elephants are capable swimmers. They have been recorded swimming for up to six hours without touching the bottom, and have travelled as far as   at a stretch and at speeds of up to  . 

===Internal and sexual organs===
 
The brain of an elephant weighs   compared to   for a human brain. While the elephant brain is larger overall, it is proportionally smaller. At birth, an elephants brain already weighs 3040% of its adult weight. The cerebrum and cerebellum are well developed, and the temporal lobes are so large that they bulge out laterally.  The throat of an elephant appears to contain a pouch where it can store water for later use. 

The heart of an elephant weighs  . It has a double-pointed apex of the heart|apex, an unusual trait among mammals.  When standing, the elephants heart beats approximately 30 times per minute.   Unlike many other animals, the heart rate speeds up by 8 to 10 beats per minute when the elephant is lying down.  The lungs are attached to the Thoracic diaphragm|diaphragm, Shoshani, pp. 7879.  and connective tissue exists in place of the pleural cavity.  As such, breathing relies mainly on the diaphragm rather than the expansion of the ribcage.  This may allow the animal to deal with the pressure differences when its body is underwater and its trunk is breaking the surface for air,    although this explanation has been questioned.  Another possible function for this adaptation is that it helps the animal suck up water through the trunk.  Elephants inhale mostly through the trunk, although some air goes through the mouth. They have a hindgut fermentation system, and their large and small intestines together reach   in length. The majority of an elephants food intake goes undigested despite the process lasting up to a day. 
 temporal gland, located in both sides of the head. This organ is associated with sexual behaviour, and males secrete a fluid from it when in musth.  Females have also been observed with secretions from the temporal glands. Sukumar, p. 149. 

==Behaviour and life history==
===Ecology and activities===
  equatorial forests, herbivorous and browsers while Etosha region of Namibia.  They go on seasonal migrations in search of food, water and mates. At Chobe National Park, Botswana, elephant herds travel   to visit the river when the local waterholes dry up. 
  seed dispersers; run off, leading to erosion. Eltringham, pp. 12427. 
  may pick through elephant dung looking for undigested seeds]] wild dogs in Africa  and tigers in Asia.  The lions of Chobe National Park#Geography and ecosystems|Savuti, Botswana, have adapted to hunting elephants during the dry season, and a pride of 30 lions has been recorded killing individuals between the ages of four and eleven years.  Elephants tend to have high numbers of parasites, particularly nematodes, compared to other herbivores. This is due to lower predation pressures that would otherwise kill off many of the individuals with significant parasite loads. 

===Social organisation===
 : note the protected position of the calves in the middle of the group]] matrilineal family groups, some of which are made up of more than ten members, including three pairs of mothers with offspring, and are led by the eldest female, or Matriarchy|matriarch.  She remains leader of the group until death  or if she no longer has the energy for the role; Kingdon, p. 53.  a study on zoo elephants showed that when the matriarch died, the levels of faecal corticosterone (stress hormone) dramatically increased in the surviving elephants.  When her tenure is over, the matriarchs eldest daughter takes her place; this occurs even if her sister is present.  The older matriarchs tend to be more effective decision-makers. 

The social circle of the female elephant does not necessarily end with the small family unit. In the case of elephants in Amboseli National Park, Kenya, a females life involves interaction with other families, clans, and subpopulations. Families may associate and bond with each other, forming what are known as bond groups. These are typically made of two family groups. During the dry season, elephant families may cluster together and form another level of social organisation known as the clan. Groups within these clans do not form strong bonds, but they defend their dry-season ranges against other clans. There are typically nine groups in a clan. The Amboseli  elephant population is further divided into the "central" and "peripheral" subpopulations. Sukumar, pp. 17579. 
 
Some elephant populations in India and Sri Lanka have similar basic social organisations. There appear to be cohesive family units and loose aggregations. They have been observed to have "nursing units" and "juvenile-care units". In southern India, elephant populations may contain family groups, bond groups and possibly clans. Family groups tend to be small, consisting of one or two adult females and their offspring. A group containing more than two adult females plus offspring is known as a "joint family". Malay elephant populations have even smaller family units, and do not have any social organisation higher than a family or bond group. Groups of African forest elephants typically consist of one adult female with one to three offspring. These groups appear to interact with each other, especially at forest clearings. 
 oestrous cow is present. Sukumar, pp. 17983. 

===Sexual behaviour===
 
====Musth====
 
  temporal gland that runs down the side of his face. He may urinate with his penis still in his Foreskin|sheath, which causes his urine to spray on his hind legs. Behaviours associated with musth include walking with the head held high and swinging, picking at the ground with the tusks, marking, rumbling and waving only one ear at a time.  This can last from a day to four months. 
 agonistic encounters. In contests between individuals from the two groups, musth bulls win the majority of the time, even when the non-musth bull is larger. A male may stop showing signs of musth when he encounters a musth male of higher rank. Those of equal rank tend to avoid each other. Agonistic encounters typically consist of threat displays, chases and minor sparring with the tusks. Serious fights are rare. Sukumar, pp. 10008. 

====Mating====
 
  polygynous breeders, copulations are most frequent during the peak of the wet season.  A cow in oestrus releases chemical signals (pheromones) in her urine and vaginal secretions to signal her readiness to mate. A bull will follow a potential mate and assess her condition with the flehmen response, which requires the male to collect a chemical sample with his trunk and bring it to the vomeronasal organ.  The oestrous cycle of a cow lasts 1416 weeks with a 46-week follicular phase and an 810-week luteal phase. While most mammals have one surge of luteinizing hormone during the follicular phase, elephants have two. The first (or anovulatory) surge, could signal to males that the female is in oestrus by changing her scent, but ovulation does not occur until the second (or ovulatory) surge.  Fertility rates in cows decline around 4550 years of age. 
 Homosexual behaviour masturbate one other with their trunks. 

===Birthing and calves===
 
Gestation in elephants typically lasts around two years with interbirth intervals usually lasting four to five years. Births tend to take place during the wet season.  Calves are born   tall and weigh around  . Moss, pp. 10613.  Typically, only a single young is born, but twins sometimes occur.  The relatively long pregnancy is maintained by five corpus luteums (as opposed to one in most mammals) and gives the foetus more time to develop, particularly the brain and trunk.    As such, newborn elephants are precocial and quickly stand and walk to follow their mother and family herd.  A new calf is usually the centre of attention for herd members. Adults and most of the other young will gather around the newborn, touching and caressing it with their trunks. For the first few days, the mother is intolerant of other herd members near her young. Alloparenting  where a calf is cared for by someone other than its mother  takes place in some family groups. Allomothers are typically two to twelve years old.  When a predator is near, the family group gathers together with the calves in the centre. 

For the first few days, the newborn is unsteady on its feet, and needs the support of its mother. It relies on touch, smell and hearing, as its eyesight is poor. It has little precise control over its trunk, which wiggles around and may cause it to trip. By its second week of life, the calf can walk more firmly and has more control over its trunk. After its first month, a calf can pick up, hold and put objects in its mouth, but cannot suck water through the trunk and must drink directly through the mouth. It is still dependent on its mother and keeps close to her. 

For its first three months, a calf relies entirely on milk from its mother for nutrition after which it begins to forage for vegetation and can use its trunk to collect water. At the same time, improvements in lip and leg coordination occur. Calves continue to suckle at the same rate as before until their sixth month, after which they become more independent when feeding. By nine months, mouth, trunk and foot coordination is perfected. After a year, a calfs abilities to groom, drink, and feed itself are fully developed. It still needs its mother for nutrition and protection from predators for at least another year. Suckling bouts tend to last 24 min/hr for a calf younger than a year and it continues to suckle until it reaches three years of age or older. Suckling after two years may serve to maintain growth rate, body condition and reproductive ability. Sukumar, pp. 12629.  Play behaviour in calves differs between the sexes; females run or chase each other, while males play-fight. The former are sexually mature by the age of nine years  while the latter become mature around 1415 years.  Elephants have long lifespans, reaching 6070 years of age.  Lin Wang, a captive male Asian elephant, lived for 86 years. 

===Communication===
 
Touching is an important form of communication among elephants. Individuals greet each other by stroking or wrapping their trunks; the latter also occurs during mild competition. Older elephants use trunk-slaps, kicks and shoves to discipline younger ones. Individuals of any age and sex will touch each others mouths, temporal glands and genitals, particularly during meetings or when excited. This allows individuals to pick up chemical cues. Touching is especially important for mothercalf communication. When moving, elephant mothers will touch their calves with their trunks or feet when side-by-side or with their tails if the calf is behind them. If a calf wants to rest, it will press against its mothers front legs and when it wants to suckle, it will touch her breast or leg. 

Visual displays mostly occur in agonistic situations. Elephants will try to appear more threatening by raising their heads and spreading their ears. They may add to the display by shaking their heads and snapping their ears, as well as throwing dust and vegetation. They are usually bluffing when performing these actions. Excited elephants may raise their trunks. Submissive ones will lower their heads and trunks, as well as flatten their ears against their necks, while those that accept a challenge will position their ears in a V shape. 
 modified by Rumbles are dB and last 1015 seconds.    For African elephants, calls range from 1535&nbsp;Hz and can be as loud as 117&nbsp;dB, allowing communication for many kilometres, with a possible maximum range of around  .   
  unmodulated sounds made by individuals that have been separated from their group and may be responded to with a "contact answer" call that starts out loud, but becomes softer. A "lets go" soft rumble is emitted by the matriarch to signal to the other herd members that it is time to move to another spot. Bulls in musth emit a distinctive, low-frequency pulsated rumble nicknamed the "motorcycle". Musth rumbles may be answered by the "female chorus", a low-frequency, modulated chorus produced by several cows. A loud postcopulatory call may be made by an oestrous cow after mating. When a cow has mated, her family may produce calls of excitement known as the "mating pandemonium". Sukumar, pp. 14245. 
 communicate with seismics, vibrations produced by impacts on the earths surface or acoustical waves that travel through it. They appear to rely on their leg and shoulder bones to transmit the signals to the middle ear. When detecting seismic signals, the animals lean forward and put more weight on their larger front feet; this is known as the "freezing behaviour". Elephants possess several adaptations suited for seismic communication. The cushion pads of the feet contain cartilaginous nodes and have similarities to the acoustic fat found in marine mammals like toothed whales and sirenians. A unique sphincter|sphincter-like muscle around the ear canal constricts the passageway, thereby dampening acoustic signals and allowing the animal to hear more seismic signals.    Elephants appear to use seismics for a number of purposes. An individual running or mock charging can create seismic signals that can be heard at great distances.  When detecting the seismics of an alarm call signalling danger from predators, elephants enter a defensive posture and family groups will pack together. Seismic waveforms produced by locomotion appear to travel distances of up to   while those from vocalisations travel  . 

===Intelligence and cognition===
  mirror self-recognition, species known to use tools. An Asian elephant has been recorded modifying branches and using them as Fly-killing device|flyswatters.  Tool modification by these animals is not as advanced as that done by chimpanzees. Elephants are popularly thought of as having an excellent memory. This could have a factual basis; they possibly have cognitive maps to allow them to remember large-scale spaces over long periods of time. Individuals appear to be able to keep track of the current l