
 
  ""      ?
      2 .     .
[Hide]
Failure
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Fail)
For other uses, see Failure (disambiguation).
"Fail" redirects here. For the Irish political party, see Fianna Fil.



Train wreck at Montparnasse, France (1895).
Failure is the state or condition of not meeting a desirable or intended objective, and may be viewed as the opposite of success. Product failure ranges from failure to sell the product to fracture of the product, in the worst cases leading to personal injury, the province of forensic engineering.
Contents  [hide] 
1 Failure in science
2 Criteria for failure
3 Types of failure
4 Commercial failures
5 Internet memes
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links
Failure in science

Thomas J. Watson is attributed with saying "If you want to succeed, double your failure rate"[citation needed]. Wired Magazine editor Kevin Kelly likewise explains that a great deal can be learned from things going unexpectedly, and that part of science's success comes from keeping blunders "small, manageable, constant, and trackable". He uses the example of engineers and programmers who push systems to their limits, breaking them to learn about them. Kelly also warns against creating a culture (e.g. school system) that punishes failure harshly, because this inhibits a creative process, and risks teaching people not to communicate important failures with others (e.g. Null results).[1]
Criteria for failure

The criteria for failure are heavily dependent on context of use, and may be relative to a particular observer or belief system. A situation considered to be a failure by one might be considered a success by another, particularly in cases of direct competition or a zero-sum game. Similarly, the degree of success or failure in a situation may be differently viewed by distinct observers or participants, such that a situation that one considers to be a failure, another might consider to be a success, a qualified success or a neutral situation.
It may also be difficult or impossible to ascertain whether a situation meets criteria for failure or success due to ambiguous or ill-defined definition of those criteria. Finding useful and effective criteria, or heuristics, to judge the success or failure of a situation may itself be a significant task.
Types of failure



All American forces in the Philippines surrender unconditionally on May 6, 1942
Failure can be differentially perceived from the viewpoints of the evaluators. A person who is only interested in the final outcome of an activity would consider it to be an Outcome Failure if the core issue has not been resolved or a core need is not met. A failure can also be a process failure whereby although the activity is completed successfully, a person may still feel dissatisfied if the underlying process is perceived to be below expected standard or benchmark.
Failure to anticipate
Failure to perceive
Failure to carry out a task
Loser is a derogatory term for a person who is (according to the standards of the observer) generally unsuccessful.
Commercial failures

A commercial failure is a product that does not reach expectations of success.
Most of the items listed below had high expectations, significant financial investments, and/or widespread publicity, but fell far short of success. Due to the subjective nature of "success" and "meeting expectations," there can be disagreement about what constitutes a "major flop."
For flops in computer and video gaming, see List of commercial failures in computer and video gaming
For company failures related to the 19972001 Dot-com bubble, see Dot-com company
See also Vaporware
Box-office bomb
Internet memes

"Epic fail" redirects here. For the House episode, see Epic Fail (House).


Adaptation of above image illustrating an Internet meme.
"Fail" is the name of a popular Internet meme where users superimpose a caption, often the word "fail" or "epic fail", onto photos or short videos depicting unsuccessful events or people falling short of expectations.[2] In July 2003, a contributor to Urban Dictionary wrote that the term, "fail," could be used as an interjection, "when one disapproves of something," citing the example: "You actually bought that? FAIL." This most likely originated as a shortened form of "You fail" or, more fully, "You fail it," the taunting "game over" message in the 1998 Japanese video game Blazing Star, notorious for its fractured English.[3][4][5] There is an entire Internet site dedicated to "fails" called Fail Blog.[3] The #fail hash tag is used on the microblogging site Twitter to indicate contempt or displeasure, and the image that accompanies the message that the site is overloaded is referred to as the "fail whale".[6]
Failboat or consignment of fail is a popular macro series, featuring images of cargo vessels tipping over or shedding cargo, with captions such as 'the failboat has arrived', or 'all aboard the failboat'. The original vessel whose image was used was the MV Cougar Ace,[citation needed] although the Ital Florida, the MV Napoli and even the SS Normandy, sunk at her berth in New York harbour, have appeared.
The term "miserable failure" has also been popularized as a result of a widely known "Google bombing," which caused Google searches for the term to turn up the White House biography of George W. Bush.[7]
See also


This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines. Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure. (April 2013)
Cascading failure
Disaster
Debugging
Fail-safe
Failure analysis
Failure mode
Failure rate
Forensic engineering
List of military disasters
List of railway disasters
Market failure
Murphy's law
New product development
Non-event
Planned obsolescence
Power outage
Product
Product management
Setting up to fail
Single point of failure
Structural failure
System accident
Tensile strength
White elephant
References

^ http://www.edge.org/q2011/q11_6.html
^ "Memes Help Keep Internet Interesting.". www.redorbit.com. March 22, 2008. Retrieved August 9, 2009.
^ a b Zimmer, Ben (August 7, 2009). "How Fail Went From Verb to Interjection.". New York Times. Retrieved August 9, 2009.
^ Schofield, Jack (17 October 2008). "All your FAIL are belong to us.". The Guardian. Retrieved August 9, 2009.
^ Beam, Christopher (2008-10-15). "Epic Win". Slate. Retrieved 2009-08-21.
^ Malik, Asmaa (24 April 2010). "Joy in the failure of others has gone competitive". Montreal Gazette. Retrieved 21 May 2010.[dead link]
^ Mikkelson, Barbara; Mikkelson, David P. (August 13, 2007). "Someone Set Us Up The Google Bomb.". Snopes.com. Retrieved August 9, 2009.
Further reading

Perrow, Charles. Normal Accidents: Living with High-Risk Technologies. New York: Basic Books, 1983. Paperback reprint, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-691-00412-9
Sandage, Scott A. Born Losers: A History of Failure in America. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2005. ISBN 0-674-01510-X, ISBN 0-674-02107-X
External links

	Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Failure
Designing Building Failures
Know Your Meme: FAIL
Zimmer, Ben (August 7, 2009), "How Fail Went From Verb to Interjection", New York Times Magazine.
Association for the Study of Failure from Japan
Categories: FailureMaintenanceReliability engineering
Navigation menu
Create accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView history

Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Toolbox
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Print/export
Languages

Brezhoneg
Deutsch
Franais
Italiano

Magyar

Portugus
Ripoarisch

Simple English
Tagalog


Ting Vit
Edit links
This page was last modified on 5 May 2013 at 16:26.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaMobile view 