 
 
 
 radical Authoritarianism|authoritarian totalitarian state that promotes the mass mobilization of the national community,   relying on a vanguard party to initiate a revolution to organize the nation on fascist principles.  Hostile to liberal democracy, socialism, and communism, fascist movements share certain common features, including the veneration of the state, a devotion to a strong leader, and an emphasis on Nationalism#Ultranationalism|ultranationalism, ethnocentrism, and militarism. Fascism views political violence, war, and imperialism as a means to achieve national rejuvenation   Stanley G. Payne. A History of Fascism, 19141945. Pp. 106.   and asserts that nations and races deemed superior should attain living space by displacing ones deemed weak or inferior.  

Fascist ideology consistently invokes the primacy of the   and  ) and a fear of foreign people (xenophobia), which they frequently linked to an exaggerated ethnocentrism. The typical fascist state also embraced militarism, a belief in the rigors and virtues of military life as an individual and national ideal, meaning much of public life was organized along military lines and an emphasis put on uniforms, parades, and monumental architecture. 

Influenced by national syndicalism, the first fascist movements emerged in Italy around World War I, combining elements of Left-wing politics|left-wing politics with more typically Right-wing politics|right-wing positions, in opposition to socialism, communism, liberal democracy and, in some cases, traditional right-wing conservatism. Although fascism is usually placed on the far right on the traditional Leftright politics|left-right spectrum, fascists themselves and some commentators have argued that the description is inadequate.   Following the Second World War, few parties openly describe themselves as fascist and the term is more usually used pejoratively by political opponents. The term neo-fascist or Post-fascism|post-fascist is sometimes applied more formally to describe parties of the far right with ideological similarities to, or roots in, 20th century fascist movements respectively.

==Etymology== Latin word ancient Roman corporal and capital punishment at his command.   The word fascismo also relates to political organizations in Italy known as fasci, groups similar to guilds or syndicates.

The symbolism of the fasces suggested strength through unity: a single rod is easily broken, while the bundle is difficult to break.  Similar symbols were developed by different fascist movements. For example the Falange symbol is five arrows joined together by a yoke. 

==Definitions==
 
Historians, political scientists and other scholars have long debated the exact nature of fascism.  Each form of fascism is distinct, leaving many definitions too wide or narrow.  

Roger Griffin describes fascism as "a genus of political ideology whose mythic core in its various permutations is a palingenetic form of populist ultranationalism".  Griffin describes the ideology as having three core components: "(i) the rebirth myth, (ii) populist ultra-nationalism and (iii) the myth of decadence".  Fascism is "a genuinely revolutionary, trans-class form of anti-liberal, and in the last analysis, anti-conservative nationalism" built on a complex range of theoretical and cultural influences. He distinguishes an inter-war period in which it manifested itself in elite-led but populist "armed party" politics opposing socialism and liberalism and promising radical politics to rescue the nation from decadence. 

Emilio Gentile describes fascism within ten constituent elements:   
{{quote|
# a mass movement with multiclass membership in which prevail, among the leaders and the militants, the middle sectors, in large part new to political activity, organized as a party militia, that bases its identity not on social hierarchy or class origin but on a sense of comradeship, believes itself invested with a mission of national regeneration, considers itself in a state of war against political adversaries and aims at conquering a monopoly of political power by using terror, parliamentary politics, and deals with leading groups, to create a new regime that destroys parliamentary democracy;
# an anti-ideological and pragmatic ideology that proclaims itself antimaterialist, anti-individualist, antiliberal, antidemocratic, anti-Marxist, is populist and anticapitalist in tendency, expresses itself aesthetically more than theoretically by means of a new political style and by myths, rites, and symbols as a lay religion designed to acculturate, socialize, and integrate the faith of the masses with the goal of creating a new man;
# a culture founded on mystical thought and the tragic and activist sense of life conceived of as the manifestation of the will to power, on the myth of youth as artificer of history, and on the exaltation of the militarization of politics as the model of life and collective activity;
# a totalitarian conception of the primacy of politics, conceived of as an integrating experience to carry out the fusion of the individual and the masses in the organic and mystical unity of the nation as an ethnic and moral community, adopting measures of discrimination and persecution against those considered to be outside this community either as enemies of the regime or members of races considered to be inferior or otherwise dangerous for the integrity of the nation;
# a civil ethic founded on total dedication to the national community, on discipline, virility, comradeship, and the warrior spirit;
# a single state party that has the task of providing for the armed defense of the regime, selecting its directing cadres, and organizing the masses within the state in a process of permanent mobilization of emotion and faith;
# a police apparatus that prevents, controls, and represses dissidence and opposition, even by using organized terror;
# a political system organized by hierarchy of functions named from the top and crowned by the figure of the leader, invested with a sacred charisma, who commands, directs, and coordinates the activities of the party and the regime;
# corporative organization of the economy that suppresses trade union liberty, broadens the sphere of state intervention, and seeks to achieve, by principles of technocracy and solidarity, the collaboration of the productive sectors under control of the regime, to achieve its goals of power, yet preserving private property and class divisions;
# a foreign policy inspired by the myth of national power and greatness, with the goal of imperialist expansion. |
Emilio Gentile}}

Stanley Payne describes fascism within three sectors of characteristics: its ideology and goals, its negations, and its style and organization. Stanley G. Payne. A History of Fascism, 19141945. University of Wisconsin Press, 1995. Pp. 7.  They are the following: 
* "A. Ideology and Goals:"
** "Espousal of an idealist, vitalist, and voluntaristic philosophy, normally involving the attempt to realize a new modern, self-determined, and secular culture"
** "Creation of a new nationalist authoritarian state not based on traditional principles or models"
** "Organization of a new highly regulated, multiclass, integrated national economic structure, whether called national corporatist, national socialist, or national syndicalist"
** "Positive evaluation and use of, or willingness to use violence and war"
** "The goal of empire, expansion, or a radical change in the nations relationship with other powers"
* "B. The Fascist Negations:"
** "Antiliberalism"
** "Anticommunism"
** "Anticonservatism (though with the understanding that fascist groups were willing to undertake temporary alliances with other sectors, more commonly with the right)"
* "C. Style and Organization:"
** "Attempted mass mobilization with militarization of political relationships and style and with the goal of a mass single party militia"
** "Emphasis on aesthetic structure of meetings, symbols, and political liturgy, stressing emotional and mystical aspects"
** "Extreme stress on the masculine principle and male dominance, while espousing a strongly organic view of society"
** "Exaltation of youth above other phases of life, emphasizing the conflict of the generations, at least in effecting the initial political transformation"
** "Specific tentency toward an authoritarian, charismatic, personal style of command, whether or not the command is to some degree initially elective" 

Paxton sees fascism as "a form of political behavior marked by obsessive preoccupation with community decline, humiliation, or victimhood and by compensatory cults of unity, energy, and purity, in which a mass-based party of committed nationalist militants, working in uneasy but effective collaboration with traditional elites, abandons democratic liberties and pursues with redemptive violence and without ethical or legal restraints goals of internal cleansing and external expansion." 

One common definition of fascism focuses on three groups of ideas:

* The Fascist Negations of anti-liberalism, anti-communism and anti-conservatism.
* Nationalist, authoritarian goals for the creation of a regulated economic structure to transform social relations within a modern, self-determined culture.
* A political aesthetic using romantic symbolism, mass mobilisation, a positive view of violence, promotion of masculinity and youth and charismatic leadership.    

===Position in the political spectrum=== extreme right" national syndicalists who combined Left-wing politics|left-wing and Right-wing politics|right-wing political views.

Fascism is considered by certain scholars to be right-wing because of its social conservatism and authoritarian means of opposing egalitarianism.   Roderick Stackleberg places fascismincluding Nazism, which he says is "a radical variant of fascism"on the right, explaining that "the more a person deems absolute equality among all people to be a desirable condition, the further left he or she will be on the ideological spectrum. The more a person considers inequality to be unavoidable or even desirable, the further to the right he or she will be." 

Italian Fascism gravitated to the right in the early 1920s.   A major element of fascism that has been deemed as clearly Far-right politics|far-right is its goal to promote the right of claimed superior people to dominate while purging society of claimed inferior elements. 

Benito Mussolini in 1919 described fascism as a movement that would strike "against the backwardness of the right and the destructiveness of the left".   Later the Italian Fascists described fascism as a right-wing ideology in the political program The Doctrine of Fascism, stating: "We are free to believe that this is the century of authority, a century tending to the right, a fascist century."   However Mussolini clarified that fascisms position on the political spectrum was not a serious issue to fascists and stated that:
 
Fascism, sitting on the right, could also have sat on the mountain of the center&nbsp;... These words in any case do not have a fixed and unchanged meaning: they do have a variable subject to location, time and spirit. We dont give a damn about these empty terminologies and we despise those who are terrorized by these words.   

The accommodation of the political right into the Italian Fascist movement in the early 1920s led to the creation of internal factions. The "Fascist left" included Michele Bianchi, Giuseppe Bottai, Angelo Oliviero Olivetti, Sergio Panunzio and Edmondo Rossoni, who were committed to advancing national syndicalism as a replacement for parliamentary liberalism in order to modernize the economy and advance the interests of workers and the common people.  The "Fascist right" included members of the paramilitary Squadristi and former members of the Italian Nationalist Association (ANI).  The Squadristi wanted to establish Fascism as a complete dictatorship, while the former ANI members, including Alfredo Rocco, sought an authoritarian corporatist state to replace the liberal state in Italy, while retaining the existing elites.  However upon accommodating the political right, there arose a group of monarchist Fascists who sought to use Fascism to create an absolute monarchy under King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy. 

After King Victor Emmanuel III forced Mussolini to resign as head of government and put him under arrest in 1943, Mussolini was rescued by German forces and now dependent on Germany for support, Mussolini and remaining loyal Fascists founded the Italian Social Republic with Mussolini as head of state. Mussolini sought to re-radicalize Italian Fascism, declaring that the Fascist state had been overthrown because Italian Fascism had been subverted by Italian conservatives and the bourgeoisie. Terence Ball, Richard Bellamy. The Cambridge History of Twentieth-Century Political Thought. Pp. 133.  Then the new Fascist government proposed the creation of workers councils and profit-sharing in industry, however German authorities who effectively controlled northern Italy at this point, ignored these measures and did not seek to enforce them. 

A number of fascist movements described themselves as a "third position" outside the traditional political spectrum.  Spanish Falangist leader Jos Antonio Primo de Rivera said: "basically the Right stands for the maintenance of an economic structure, albeit an unjust one, while the Left stands for the attempt to subvert that economic structure, even though the subversion thereof would entail the destruction of much that was worthwhile". 

===Fascist as insult===
 
Following the defeat of the Axis powers in World War II, the term fascist has been used as a pejorative word,  often referring to widely varying movements across the political spectrum.  George Orwell wrote in 1944 that "the word Fascism is almost entirely meaningless&nbsp;... almost any English person would accept bully as a synonym for Fascist".   Richard Griffiths argued in 2005 that "fascism" is the "most misused, and over-used word, of our times".  "Fascist" is sometimes applied to post-war organizations and ways of thinking that academics more commonly term "neo-fascism|neo-fascist". 

Contrary to the common mainstream academic and popular use of the term, Communist states have sometimes been referred to as "fascist", typically as an insult. Marxist interpretations of the term have, for example, been applied in relation to Cuba under Fidel Castro and Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh.  Herbert Matthews, of the New York Times asked "Should we now place Stalinist Russia in the same category as Hitlerite Germany? Should we say that she is Fascist?"  J. Edgar Hoover wrote extensively of "Red Fascism".  Chinese Marxists used the term to denounce the Soviet Union during the Sino-Soviet Split, and likewise, the Soviets used the term to identify Chinese Marxists. 

==History==
 

===Fin de sicle era and the fusion of Maurrasism with Sorelianism (18801914)===
The ideological roots of fascism have been traced to the 1880s, and in particular the fin de sicle theme of that time.   The theme was based on revolt against materialism, rationalism, positivism, bourgeois society and democracy.  The fin-de-sicle generation supported emotionalism, irrationalism, subjectivism and vitalism.  The fin-de-sicle mindset saw civilization as being in a crisis that required a massive and total solution.  The fin-de-sicle intellectual school considered the individual as only one part of the larger collectivity, which should not be viewed as an atomized numerical sum of individuals.  They condemned the rationalistic individualism of liberal society and the dissolution of social links in bourgeois society. 
 Darwinian biology; Wagnerian aesthetics; Arthur de Gobineaus Racism|racialism; Gustave Le Bons psychology; and the philosophies of Friedrich Nietzsche, Fyodor Dostoyevsky and Henri Bergson.  Social Darwinism, which gained widespread acceptance, made no distinction between physical and social life, and viewed the human condition as being an unceasing struggle to achieve the survival of the fittest.  Social Darwinism challenged positivisms claim of deliberate and rational choice as the determining behaviour of humans, with social Darwinism focusing on heredity, race, and environment.  Social Darwinisms emphasis on biogroup identity and the role of organic relations within societies fostered legitimacy and appeal for nationalism.  New theories of social and political psychology also rejected the notion of human behaviour being governed by rational choice, and instead claimed that emotion was more influential in political issues than reason.  Nietzsches argument that "God is dead" coincided with his attack on the "herd mentality" of Christianity, democracy and modern collectivism; his concept of the bermensch; and his advocacy of the will to power as a primordial instinct, were major influences upon many of the fin-de-sicle generation.  Bergsons claim of the existence of an "lan vital" or vital instinct centred upon free choice and rejected the processes of materialism and determinism, this challenged Marxism. 
 The Ruling Class (1896) developed the theory that claims that in all societies an "organized minority" will dominate and rule over the "disorganized majority".   Mosca claims that there are only two classes in society, "the governing" (the organized minority) and "the governed" (the disorganized majority).  He claims that the organized nature of the organized minority makes it irresistible to any individual of the disorganized majority. 

The rise of support for anarchism in this period of time was important in influencing the politics of fascism.  The anarchist Mikhail Bakunins concept of propaganda of the deed that stressed the importance of direct action as the primary means of politics - including revolutionary violence, became popular amongst fascists who admired the concept and adopted it as a part of fascism. 

 
 French nationalist and reactionary monarchist Charles Maurras influenced fascism.  Maurras promoted what he called integral nationalism, that called for organic unity of a nation, Maurras insisted that a powerful monarch was an ideal leader of a nation. Maurras distrusted what he considered the democratic mystification of the popular will that created an impersonal collective subject.  He claimed that a powerful monarch was a personified sovereign who could exercise authority to unite a nations people.  Maurras integral nationalism was idealized by fascists, but modified into a modernized revolutionary form that was devoid of Maurras monarchism. 
 revisionist of Sorelian syndicalism as a means to confront democracy.  Maurras famously stated "a socialism liberated from the democratic and cosmopolitan element fits nationalism well as a well made glove fits a beautiful hand". 

 ]]
The fusion of Maurassian nationalism and Sorelian syndicalism influenced radical Italian nationalist   values, democracy, liberalism, Marxism, Internationalism (politics)|internationalism, and pacifism, and the promotion of heroism, vitalism, and violence.  The ANI claimed that liberal democracy was no longer compatible with the modern world, and advocated a strong state and imperialism, claiming that humans are naturally predatory and that nations were in a constant struggle, in which only the strongest could survive. 

 , Italian modernist author of the Futurist Manifesto (1908) and later the co-author of the Fascist Manifesto (1919)]]
Futurism that was both an artistic-cultural movement and initially a political movement in Italy led by Filippo Tommaso Marinetti who founded the Futurist Manifesto (1908), that championed the causes of modernism, action, and political violence as necessary elements of politics while denouncing liberalism and parliamentary politics. Marinetti rejected conventional democracy for based on majority rule and egalitarianism while promoting a new form of democracy, that he described in his work "The Futurist Conception of Democracy" as the following: "We are therefore able to give the directions to create and to dismantle to numbers, to quantity, to the mass, for with us number, quantity and mass will never beas they are in Germany and Russiathe number, quantity and mass of mediocre men, incapable and indecisive". 

Futurism influenced fascism in its emphasis on recognizing the virile nature of violent action and war as being necessities of modern civilization. Gigliola Gori. Italian Fascism and the Female Body: Submissive Women and Strong Mothers. Oxfordshire, England, UK; New York, New York, USA: Routledge, 2004. Pp. 14.  Marinetti promoted the need of physical training of young men, saying that in male education, gymnastics should take precedence over books, and he advocated segregation of the genders on this matter, in that womanly sensibility must not enter mens education whom Marinetti claimed must be "lively, bellicose, muscular and violently dynamic". 

===World War I and aftermath (19141929)===
  in 1917, as a soldier in World War I. In 1914, Mussolini founded the Fasci dAzione Rivoluzionaria that he led. Mussolini promoted the Italian intervention in the war as a revolutionary nationalist action to liberate Italian-claimed lands from Austria-Hungary.]] Fasci of Fasci of Revolutionary Action. 

Mussolini accused conventional socialists for being  , Mikhail Bakunin,  , Mussolini noted from the proceedings of the members that "the difficult question of irredentism was posed and resolved in the ambit of ideals of socialism and liberty which do not however exclude the safeguarding of a positive national interest".  Its attempts to hold mass meetings were ineffective and it was regularly harassed by government authorities and socialists.  Antagonism between interventionists, including Fascists, and anti-interventionist socialists resulted in violence. 

 " by Johann Plenge identified the outbreak of war as forging national solidarity of Germans.]] technocratic state. 

Fascists viewed World War I as bringing revolutionary changes in the nature of war, society, the state, and technology, as the advent of total war and mass mobilization had broken down the distinction between civilian and combatant, as civilians had become a critical part in economic production for the war effort, and thus arose a "military citizenship" in which all citizens were involved to the military in some manner during the war.  Michael Mann. Fascists. Cambridge University Press, 2004. Pp. 65.  World War I had resulted in the rise of a powerful state capable of mobilizing millions of people to serve on the frontlines or provide economic production and logistics to support those on the front lines, as well as having precedented authority to intervene in the lives of citizens.   Fascists viewed technological developments of weaponry and the states total mobilization of its population in the war as symbolizing the beginning of a new era fusing state power with mass politics, technology, and particularly the mobilizing myth that they contended had triumphed over the myth of progress and the era of liberalism. 

  corps in 1918 holding daggers, a symbol of their group. The Arditi were founded in 1917 as groups of soldiers trained for: dangerous missions, refusal to surrender, and to be willing to fight to the death. The Arditis black uniform and use of the fez, were adopted by the Italian Fascist movement in homage to the Arditi.]] Fasci of Revolutionary Action praised the October Revolution, however Mussolini later became unimpressed with Lenin, regarding him as merely a new version of Tsar Nicholas.  After World War I fascists have commonly campaigned on anti-Marxist agendas.  However both Bolshevism and fascism hold ideological similarities: both advocate a revolutionary ideology, both believe in the necessity of a vanguard elite, both have disdain for bourgeois values, and both had totalitarian ambitions.  In practice, fascism and Bolshevism have commonly emphasized revolutionary action, proletarian nation theories, single-party states, and party-armies. 

With the antagonism between anti-interventionist Marxists and pro-interventionist Fascists complete by the end of the war, the two sides became irreconcilable. The Fascists presented themselves as Anti-communism|anti-Marxists and as opposed to the Marxists.  Benito Mussolini consolidated control over the Fascist movement in 1919 with the founding of the Fasci italiani di combattimento, whose opposition to socialism he declared:

 
 Futurist movement The Manifesto and women corporatist system of "National Councils" of experts, selected from professionals and tradespeople, elected to represent and hold legislative power over their respective areas, including labour, industry, transportation, public health, communications, etc.; and the abolition of the Italian Senate.  The Manifesto supported the creation of an Eight-hour day|eight-hour work day for all workers, a minimum wage, worker representation in industrial management, equal confidence in labour unions as in industrial executives and public servants, reorganization of the transportation sector, revision of the draft law on invalidity insurance, reduction of the retirement age from 65 to 55, a strong progressive tax on capital, confiscation of the property of religious institutions and abolishment of bishoprics, and revision of military contracts to allow the government to seize 85% of their  profits.  It also called for the creation of a short-service national militia to serve defensive duties, nationalization of the armaments industry, and a foreign policy designed to be peaceful but also competitive. 

  cheer the arrival of Gabriele dAnnunzio and his blackshirt-wearing nationalist raiders. DAnnunzio and Fascist Alceste De Ambris developed the quasi-fascist Italian Regency of Carnaro, a city-state in Fiume, from 1919 to 1920. DAnnunzios actions in Fiume inspired the Italian Fascist movement.]] Fiume by corporatist productionism alongside DAnnunzios political views.  Many Fascists saw the Charter of Carnaro as an ideal constitution for a Fascist Italy.  This behaviour of aggression towards Yugoslavia and South Slavs was pursued by Italian Fascists with their persecution of South Slavs - especially Slovenes and Croats.

With the 1920, militant strike activity by industrial workers reached its peak in Italy, where 1919 and 1920 were known as the "Red Years".  Mussolini and the Fascists took advantage of the situation by allying with industrial businesses and attacking workers and peasants in the name of preserving order and internal peace in Italy. 

Fascists identified their primary opponents as the majority of socialists on the left who had opposed intervention in World War I.  The Fascists and the Italian political right held common ground: both held Marxism in contempt, discounted class consciousness and believed in the rule of elites.  The Fascists assisted the anti-socialist campaign by allying with the other parties and the conservative right in a mutual effort to destroy the Italian Socialist Party and labour organizations committed to class identity above national identity. 
 conservatives by making major alterations to its political agenda; abandoning its previous populism, republicanism, and anticlericalism, adopting policies in support of free enterprise, and accepting the Roman Catholic Church and the monarchy as institutions in Italy.  To appeal to Italian conservatives, Fascism adopted policies such as promoting family values, including promotion policies designed to reduce the number of women in the workforce limiting the womans role to that of a mother. The fascists banned literature on birth control and increased penalties for abortion in 1926, declaring both crimes against the state.  Though Fascism adopted a number of positions designed to appeal to Reactionary|reactionaries, the Fascists sought to maintain Fascisms revolutionary character, with Angelo Oliviero Olivetti saying "Fascism would like to be conservative, but it will   by being revolutionary."  The Fascists supported revolutionary action and committed to secure law and order to appeal to both conservatives and syndicalists. 

Prior to Fascisms accommodation of the political right, Fascism was a small, urban, northern Italian movement that had about a thousand members.  After Fascisms accommodation of the political right, the Fascist movements membership soared to approximately 250,000 by 1921. 
 Catholic unions in Cremona and imposed forced Italianization upon the German-speaking population of Trent and Bolzano.  After seizing these cities, the Fascists made plans to take Rome. 
 Balbo and de Vecchi]]
On 24 October 1922, the Fascist party held its annual congress in Naples, where Mussolini ordered Blackshirts to take control of public buildings and trains and to converge on three points around Rome.  The Fascists managed to seize control of several post offices and trains in northern Italy while the Italian government, led by a left-wing coalition, was internally divided and unable to respond to the Fascist advances.  King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy perceived the risk of bloodshed in Rome in response to attempting to disperse the Fascists to be too high.  Victor Emmanuel III decided to appoint Mussolini as Prime Minister of Italy, and Mussolini arrived in Rome on 30 October to accept the appointment.  Fascist propaganda aggrandized this event, known as "March on Rome", as a "seizure" of power because of Fascists heroic exploits. 
 economically liberal policies under the direction of liberal finance minister Alberto De Stefani, including balancing the budget through deep cuts to the civil service.  Initially, little drastic change in government policy had occurred and repressive police actions were limited. 
 Aventine Secession.  On 3 January 1925, Mussolini addressed the Fascist-dominated Italian parliament and declared that he was personally responsible for what happened, but he insisted that he had done nothing wrong. He proclaimed himself dictator of Italy, assuming full responsibility over the government and announcing the dismissal of parliament.  From 1925 to 1929, Fascism steadily became entrenched in power: opposition deputies were denied access to parliament, censorship was introduced, and a December 1925 decree made Mussolini solely responsible to the King. 

In 1929, the Fascist regime gained the political support and blessing of the Roman Catholic Church after the regime signed a concordat with the Church, known as the Lateran Treaty, which gave the papacy state sovereignty and financial compensation for the seizure of Church lands by the liberal state in the nineteenth century. 
 corporatist economic Charter of Labour, which established workers rights and duties and created labour tribunals to arbitrate employer-employee disputes.  In practice, the sectoral corporations exercised little independence and were largely controlled by the regime, and employee organizations were rarely led by employees themselves but instead by appointed Fascist party members. 
 Bedouin Cyrenaicans, half the population of Cyrenaica in Libya, from their settlements that was slated to be given to Italian settlers.   

  during the Beer Hall Putsch.]]
The March on Rome brought Fascism international attention. One early admirer of the Italian Fascists was Adolf Hitler, who, less than a month after the March, had begun to model himself and the Nazi Party upon Mussolini and the Fascists.  The Nazis, led by Hitler and the German war hero Erich Ludendorff, attempted a "March on Berlin" modeled upon the March on Rome, which resulted in the failed Beer Hall Putsch in Munich in November 1923. 

===International surge of fascism and World War II (192945)===
  (left) and Adolf Hitler (right).]]

The events of the Great Depression resulted in an international surge of fascism and the creation of several fascist regimes and regimes that adopted fascist policies. The most important new fascist regime was Nazi Germany, under the leadership of Adolf Hitler. With the rise of Hitler and the Nazis to power in 1933, liberal democracy was dissolved in Germany, and the Nazis mobilized the country for war, with expansionist territorial aims against several countries. In the 1930s the Nazis implemented racial laws that deliberately discriminated against, disenfranchised, and persecuted Jews and other racial and minority groups. 
 Party of Francist Movement and multiple far right movements rioted en masse in Paris against the French government resulting in major political violence.  A variety of para-fascist governments that borrowed elements from fascism were formed during the Great Depression, including those of Greece, Lithuania, Poland, and Yugoslavia. 

 
  in 1940.]] Brazilian Integralists Estado Novo of Getlio Vargas in 1937.  In the 1930s, the National Socialist Movement of Chile gained seats in Chiles parliament and attempted a coup dtat that resulted in the Seguro Obrero massacre of 1938. 
 Institute for protectionist policies, including forcing the German steel industry to use lower-quality German iron ore rather than superior-quality imported iron.  

In Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany both Mussolini and Hitler pursued territorial expansionist and interventionist foreign policy agendas from the 1930s through the 1940s culminating in World War II. Mussolini called for irredentist Italian claims to be reclaimed, establishing Italian domination of the Mediterranean Sea and securing Italian access to the Atlantic Ocean, and the creation of Italian spazio vitale ("vital space") in the Mediterranean and Red Sea regions.  Hitler called for irredentist German claims to be reclaimed along with the creation of German lebensraum ("living space") in Eastern Europe, including territories held by the Soviet Union, that would be colonized by Germans. 

 .]]
  male inmate at the Italian Rab concentration camp.]] remilitarized the industrial Rhineland; the region had been ordered demilitarized by the Treaty of Versailles. In 1938 Germany annexed Austria and Italy assisted in Germany in resolving the diplomatic crisis between Germany versus Britain and France over claims on Czechoslovakia by arranging the Munich Agreement that gave Germany the Sudetenland and was perceived at the time to have averted a European war, these hopes faded when Hitler violated the Munich Agreement by ordering the invasion and partition of Czechoslovakia between Germany and a client state of Slovakia in 1939. At the same time from 1938 to 1939, Italy was demanding territorial and colonial concessions from France and Britain.  In 1939, Germany prepared for war with Poland, but attempted to gain territorial concessions from Poland through diplomatic means.  The Polish government did not trust Hitlers promises and refused to accept Germanys demands. 

The invasion of Poland by Germany was deemed unacceptable by Britain, France and their allies, resulting in their mutual declaration of war against Germany that was deemed the aggressor in the war in Poland, resulting in the outbreak of World War II. In 1940, Mussolini led Italy into World War II on the side of the Axis Powers|Axis. Mussolini was aware that Italy did not have the military capacity to carry out a long war with France or the United Kingdom and waited until France was on the verge of imminent collapse and surrender from German invasion before declaring war on France and the United Kingdom on 10 June 1940, on the assumption that the war would be short-lived following Frances collapse.  Mussolini believed that following a brief entry of Italy into war with France, followed by the imminent French surrender, Italy could gain some territorial concessions from France and then concentrate its forces on a major offensive in Egypt where British and Commonwealth forces were outnumbered by Italian forces.  Plans by Germany to invade the UK in 1940 failed after Germany lost the aerial warfare campaign in the Battle of Britain. The war became prolonged contrary to Mussolinis plans resulting in Italy losing battles on multiple fronts and requiring German assistance. In 1941 the Axis campaign spread to the Soviet Union after Hitler launched Operation Barbarossa. Axis forces at the height of their power controlled almost all of continental Europe.

During World War II, the Axis Powers in Europe, led by Nazi Germany participated in the extermination of millions of Poles, Jews, Gypsies and others in the genocide known as the Holocaust. In Asia, Japan committed large massacres of Chinese civilians.

After 1942, Axis forces began to falter. By 1943, after Italy faced multiple military failures, complete reliance and subordination of Italy to Germany, and Allied invasion of Italy, and corresponding international humiliation, Mussolini was removed as head of government and arrested by the order of King Victor Emmanuel III who proceeded to dismantle the Fascist state and declared Italys switching of allegiance to the Allied side. Mussolini was rescued from arrest by German forces and led the German client state, the Italian Social Republic from 1943 to 1945. Nazi Germany faced multiple losses and steady Soviet and Western Allied offensives from 1943 to 1945. 

On 28 April 1945, Mussolini was captured and executed by Italian communist partisans. On 30 April 1945, Hitler committed suicide. Shortly afterwards Germany surrendered and the Nazi regime was dismantled and key Nazi members arrested to stand trial for crimes against humanity involving the Holocaust.

===Post-World-War II (1945present)===
 , the quasi-fascist Caudillo of Spain from 1939 to 1975.]]
 , President of Argentina from 1946 to 1955 and 1973 to 1974. Pern admired Italian Fascism and modelled his economic policies on those pursued by Fascist Italy.]] 

In the aftermath of World War II, the victory of the Allies over the Axis powers led to the collapse of multiple fascist regimes in Europe. The Nuremberg Trials convicted multiple Nazi leaders of crimes against humanity involving the Holocaust.

However there remained multiple ideologies and governments that were ideologically related to fascism. 
 Falangist single-party state in Spain was officially neutral in World War II and survived the collapse of the Axis Powers. Francos rise to power had been directly assisted by the militaries of Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany during the Spanish Civil War, and had sent volunteers to fight on the side of Nazi Germany against the Soviet Union during World War II. After World War II and a period of international isolation, Francos regime normalized relations with Western powers in the Cold War, until Francos death in 1975 and the transformation of Spain into a liberal democracy.

Peronism associated with the regime of Juan Peron in Argentina from 1946 to 1955 and 1973 to 1974, was strongly influenced by fascism.  Prior to rising to power, from 1939 to 1941, Peron had developed a deep admiration of Italian Fascism and modelled his economic policies on Italian Fascist economic policies. 

  founder Michel Aflaq (left) with Iraqi President Saddam Hussein (right) in 1988.]]
 Arab nationalist Syrian President Iraqi President Saddam Hussein created personality cults around themselves portraying themselves as the nationalist saviours of the Arab world.  

  (1940) during the Iran-Iraq War, including other works alleging of Jewish-Persian conspiracy against Iraq dating back to ancient times when Nebuchadnezzar II persecuted the Jews in Babylonia while the Persia allowed the Babylonian Jews to seek refuge in their lands.  Historian of fascism Stanley Payne has said about Saddam Husseins regime: "There will probably never again be a reproduction of the Third Reich, but Saddam Hussein has come closer than any other dictator since 1945". 

==Tenets==

===Nationalism=== millenarian national race above racist conception of non-Europeans being inferior to Europeans. Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 1995, 2005. Pp. 11.  However beyond this, fascists in Europe have not held a unified set of racial views.  

Historically most fascists promoted imperialism, however there were several fascist movements that were uninterested in the pursuit of new imperial ambitions. 

===Totalitarianism=== totalitarian state.  The Doctrine of Fascism states, "The Fascist conception of the State is all-embracing; outside of it no human or spiritual values can exist, much less have value. Thus understood, Fascism is totalitarian, and the Fascist Statea synthesis and a unit inclusive of all valuesinterprets, develops, and potentiates the whole life of a people."  In The Legal Basis of the Total State, Nazi political theorist Carl Schmitt described the Nazi intention to form a "strong state which guarantees a totality of political unity transcending all diversity" in order to avoid a "disastrous pluralism tearing the German people apart". 

Fascist states pursued policies of social indoctrination through propaganda in education and the media and regulation of the production of educational and media materials.   Education was designed to glorify the fascist movement and inform students of its historical and political importance to the nation. It attempted to purge ideas that were not consistent with the beliefs of the fascist movement and to teach students to be obedient to the state. 

===Third Position economics===

Fascism supports a state-controlled economy that accepts a mix of  . However it emphasizes that industries must uphold the national interest as superior to private profit.  
 third position" alternative to capitalism and Marxism, as fascism declares both as being obsolete.  Such an economic system, is variously termed by fascists as "national corporatism", "national socialism" or "national syndicalism". 

Benito Mussolini spoke of this as a "Third Alternative" in 1940 upon Italys entry into World War II, saying:

 

While fascism accepts the importance of material wealth and power, it condemns materialism that it identifies as being present in both communism and capitalism, and criticizes their materialist basis for lacking acknowledgement of the role of the spirit. 

Fascism officially advocates resolution to domestic class conflict within a nation to secure national solidarity.  While fascism opposes domestic class conflict, fascism believes that bourgeois-proletarian conflict primarily exists in national conflict between proletarian nations versus bourgeois nations.  

Fascism denounces capitalism not because of its competitive nature nor its support of private property that fascism supports; but due to its materialism, individualism, alleged bourgeois decadence, and alleged indifference to the nation. Robert O. Paxton. The Anatomy of Fascism. Vintage Books edition. Vintage Books, 2005. Pp. 10.  Fascism denounces Marxism for its advocacy of materialist internationalist class identity that fascism regards as an attack upon the emotional and spiritual bonds of nationality and thwarting the achievement of genuine national solidarity. 
 middle and lower-middle classes, who filled jobs in the vastly expanded government workforce, which grew from about 500,000 to 1,000,000 jobs in 1930 alone.  Health and welfare spending grew dramatically under Italian fascism, with welfare rising from 7% of the budget in 1930 to 20% in 1940. 

The Opera Nazionale Dopolavoro (OND) or "National After-work Program" was one major social welfare initiative in Fascist Italy. Created in 1925, it was the states largest recreational organisation for adults.  The Dopolavoro was responsible for establishing and maintaining 11,000 sports grounds, over 6,400 libraries, 800 movie houses, 1,200 theatres, and over 2,000 orchestras.  Membership of the Dopolavoro was voluntary, but it had high participation because of its nonpolitical nature.  It is estimated that, by 1936, the OND had organised 80% of salaried workers  and, by 1939, 40% of the industrial workforce. The sports activities proved popular with large numbers of workers. The OND had the largest membership of any of the mass Fascist organisations in Italy. 

The enormous success of the Dopolavoro in Fascist Italy was the key factor in Nazi Germanys creation of its own version of the Dopolavoro, the Kraft durch Freude (KdF) or "Strength through Joy" program of the Nazi governments German Labour Front, which became even more successful than the Dopolavoro.  KdF provided government-subsidized holidays for German workers.  KdF was also responsible for the creation of the original Volkswagen ("Peoples Car"), a state-manufactured automobile that was meant to be cheap enough to allow all German citizens to be able to own one.
 egalitarian reasons. social Darwinist views.  
Adolf Hitler was opposed to egalitarian and universal social welfare because, in his view, it encouraged the preservation of the degenerate and feeble.  While in power, the Nazis created social welfare programs to deal with the large numbers of unemployed. However, those programs were neither egalitarian nor universal, excluding many minority groups and other people whom they felt posed a threat to the future health of the German people. 

===Action===
Fascism emphasizes direct action, including supporting the legitimacy of political violence, as a core part of its politics.   Fascism views violent action as a necessity in politics that fascism identifies as being an "endless struggle". Fascism and Political Theory: Critical Perspectives on Fascist Ideology. Routledge. Oxon, England, UK; New York, New York, USA: Routledge, 2010. Pp. 106. 
 social Darwinist degenerate people, while simultaneously promoting the creation of strong people, in order to survive in a world defined by perpetual national and racial conflict. 

===Age and gender roles===
Fascism emphasizes   ("The Youth").  Fascism identifies the physical age period of youth as a critical time for the moral development of people that will affect society.  

Italian Fascism pursued what it called "moral hygiene" of youth, particularly regarding  , most forms of birth control and contraceptive devices (with the exception of the condom), homosexuality, and prostitution as deviant sexual behaviour, although enforcement of laws opposed to such practices was erratic and authorities often turned a blind eye.  Fascist Italy regarded the promotion of male sexual excitation before puberty as the cause of criminality amongst male youth.  Fascist Italy declared homosexuality to be a social disease.  Fascist Italy pursued an aggressive campaign to reduce prostitution of young women. 

Mussolini perceived womens primary role to be childbearers, while men were warriors, once saying, "war is to man what maternity is to the woman".  In an effort to increase birthrates, the Italian Fascist government gave financial incentives to women who raised large families, and initiated policies designed to reduce the number of women employed.  Italian Fascism called for women to be honoured as "reproducers of the nation", and the Italian Fascist government held ritual ceremonies to honour womens role within the Italian nation.  In 1934, Mussolini declared that employment of women was a "major aspect of the thorny problem of unemployment" and that for women, working was "incompatible with childbearing". Mussolini went on to say that the solution to unemployment for men was the "exodus of women from the work force". 

The German Nazi government strongly encouraged women to stay at home to bear children and keep house.  This policy was reinforced by bestowing the Cross of Honor of the German Mother on women bearing four or more babies. The unemployment rate was cut substantially, mostly through arms production and sending women home so that men could take their jobs. Nazi propaganda sometimes promoted premarital and extramarital sexual relations, unwed motherhood and divorce, but at other times the Nazis opposed such behaviour.  The growth of Nazi power, however, was accompanied by a breakdown of traditional sexual morals with regard to extramarital sex and licentiousness. 
 abortion by its eugenics law, to promote abortion for women with hereditary disorders.  The law allowed abortion if a woman gave her permission and the fetus was not yet viable,   and for purposes of so-called racial hygiene.  

The Nazis argued that homosexuality was degenerate, effeminate, perverted, and undermined masculinity because it did not produce children.  They considered homosexuality curable through therapy, citing modern scientism and the study of sexology, which said that homosexuality could be felt by "normal" people and not just an abnormal minority.  Open homosexuals were interned in Nazi concentration camps. 

===Palingenesis and modernism===
Fascism emphasizes both  .  Fascism accepts forms of modernism that it deems promotes national regeneration while rejecting forms of modernism that are regarded as antithetical to national regeneration.  Fascism aestheticized modern technology and its association with speed, power, and violence.  Fascism admired advances in the economy in the early 20th century, particularly Fordism and scientific management.  Fascist modernism has been recognized to be inspired or developed by various figures such as Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, Ernst Jnger, Gottfried Benn, Louis-Ferdinand Cline, Knut Hamsun, Ezra Pound, and Wyndham Lewis.  

In Italy, such modernist influence was exemplified by Marinetti who advocated a palingenetic modernist society that condemned liberal-bourgeois values of tradition and psychology, while promoting a technological-martial religion of national renewal that emphasized militant nationalism.  In Germany, it was exemplified by Jnger who was influenced by his observation of the technological warfare during World War I, and claimed that a new social class had been created that he described as the "warrior-worker". "Fascist Modernism" by Jobst Welge. Astradur Eysteinsson (ed.), Vivian Liska (ed.). Modernism, Volumes 1-2. John Benjamins Publishing, 2007. Pp. 553.  Jnger like Marinetti emphasized the revolutionary capacities of technology, and emphasized an "organic construction" between human and machine as a liberating and regenerative force in that challenged liberal democracy, conceptions of individual autonomy, bourgeois nihilism, and decadence.  He conceived of a society based on a totalitarian concept of "total mobilization" of such disciplined warrior-workers. 
<!--  commenting out as this section needs to be reorganized into the article===Economic policies===
 

According to Bruce Pauley, Fascist governments exercised control over private property but did not nationalize it.  However, according to Patricia Knight, they did, with the Italian Fascist government coming to own the highest percentage of industries outside the Soviet Union.  The Nazis also nationalized some business.  In fact, the "Twenty-Five Point Programme" of the Nazi party, adopted in 1920, demanded "the nationalization of all businesses which have been formed into corporations."  Other scholars noted that big business developed an increasingly close partnership with the Nazi and Fascist governments as it became increasingly organized. Business leaders supported the governments political and military goals, and in exchange, the government pursued economic policies that maximized the profits of its business allies.  Nazi Germany transferred public ownership and public services into the private sector, while other Western capitalist countries strove for increased state ownership of industry.  In his book, Big Business in the Third Reich, Arthur Schweitzer notes that, "Monopolistic price fixing became the rule in most industries, and cartels were no longer confined to the heavy or large-scale industries.&nbsp;... Cartels and quasi-cartels (whether of big business or small) set prices, engaged in limiting production, and agreed to divide markets and classify consumers in order to realize a monopoly profit.  

Fascists pursued economic policies to strengthen state power and spread ideology, such as consolidating trade unions to be state- or party-controlled.  Attempts were made by both Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany to establish "autarky" (self-sufficiency) through significant economic planning, but neither achieved economic self-sufficiency. 

====National corporatism, statism and national syndicalism====
Italian Fascisms economy was based on corporatism, and a number of other fascist movements similarly promoted corporatism. Oswald Mosley of the British Union of Fascists, describing fascist corporatism, said that "it means a nation organized as the human body, with each organ performing its individual function but working in harmony with the whole".  Fascists were not hostile to the petit-bourgeoisie or to small businesses, and they promised these groups, alongside the proletariat, protection from the upper-class bourgeoisie, big business, and Marxism. The promotion of these groups is the source of the term "extremism of the centre" to describe fascism. 

Fascism blamed capitalist liberal democracies for creating class conflict and communists for exploiting it.  In Italy, the Fascist period presided over the creation of the largest number of state-owned enterprises in Western Europe, such as the nationalisation of petroleum companies into a single state enterprise called the Italian General Agency for Petroleum (Azienda Generale Italiani Petroli, AGIP).  Fascists made populist appeals to the middle class, especially the lower middle class, by promising to protect small businesses and property owners from communism, and by promising an economy based on competition and profit while pledging to oppose big business. 
 heroic capitalism (18301870), followed by static capitalism (18701914), and reaching its final form of decadent capitalism or "Supercapitalism (concept in Italian Fascism)|supercapitalism" beginning in 1914.  Mussolini argued that Italian Fascism acknowledged the positive achievements of dynamic and heroic capitalism for its contribution to industrialism and its technical developments, but that it did not favour supercapitalism, which he claimed was incompatible with Italys agricultural sector. 

Thus Mussolini claimed that Italy under Fascist rule was not capitalist in the contemporary use of the term, which referred to supercapitalism.  Mussolini denounced supercapitalism for causing the "standardization of humankind" and for causing excessive consumption.  Mussolini claimed that at the stage of supercapitalism, "a capitalist enterprise, when difficulties arise, throws itself like a dead weight into the states arms. It is then that state intervention begins and becomes more necessary. It is then that those who once ignored the state now seek it out anxiously."  He saw Fascism as the next logical step to solve the problems of supercapitalism and claimed that "our path would lead inexorably into state capitalism, which is nothing more nor less than state socialism turned on its head. In either event, the result is the bureaucratization of the economic activities of the nation."  Mussolini claimed that dynamic or heroic capitalism and the bourgeoisie could be prevented from degenerating into static capitalism and then supercapitalism if the concept of economic individualism were abandoned and if state supervision of the economy was introduced.  Private enterprise would control production but it would be supervised by the state.  By the late 1930s and the 1940s, Italian Fascism completely denounced capitalism as an obsolete and oppressive system, Mussolini in 1940 at the entry of Italy into World War II, said: 
 

Italian Fascism presented the economic system of corporatism as the solution that would preserve private enterprise and property while allowing the state to intervene in the economy when private enterprise failed. 

Other fascist regimes were indifferent or hostile to corporatism. The Nazis initially attempted to form a corporatist economic system like that of Fascist Italy, creating the National Socialist Institute for Corporatism in May 1933, which included many major economists who argued that corporatism was consistent with National Socialism.   In Mein Kampf, Hitler spoke enthusiastically about the "National Socialist corporative idea" as one which would eventually "take the place of ruinous class warfare".  However, the Nazis later came to view corporatism as detrimental to Germany and institutionalizing and legitimizing social differences within the German nation. Instead, the Nazis began to promote economic organisation that emphasized the biological unity of the German national community. 

Hitler continued to refer to corporatism in propaganda, but it was not put into place, even though a number of Nazi officials such as Walther Darr, Gottfried Feder, Alfred Rosenburg, and Gregor Strasser were in favour of a Neo-medievalism|neo-medievalist form of corporatism, since corporations had been influential in German history in the medieval era. 

Spanish Falangist leader Jos Antonio Primo de Rivera did not believe that corporatism was effective and denounced it as a propaganda ploy, saying "this stuff about the corporative state is another piece of windbaggery". 

====Economic planning==== third way" between capitalism and communism. 
 Nazis and Jewish conspiracy". price controls, economic interventionist measures. 

Fascists thought that private property should be regulated to ensure that "benefit to the community precedes benefit to the individual."  Private property rights were supported but were contingent upon service to the state.  For example, "an owner of agricultural land may be compelled to raise wheat instead of sheep and employ more labour than he would find profitable."  However, they promoted the interests of successful small businesses.  Mussolini wrote approvingly of the notion that profits should not be taken away from those who produced them by their own labour, saying "I do not respect&nbsp; I even hate&nbsp; those men that leech a tenth of the riches produced by others". 

According to historian Tibor Ivan Berend, dirigisme was an inherent aspect of fascist economies.  The Labour Charter of 1927, promulgated by the Grand Council of Fascism, stated in article 7: "The corporative State considers private initiative, in the field of production, as the most efficient and useful instrument of the Nation", then continued in article 9: "State intervention in economic production may take place only where private initiative is lacking or is insufficient, or when are at stakes the political interest of the State. This intervention may take the form of control, encouragement or direct management."   -->

==Criticism of fascism==
Fascism has been widely criticized and condemned in popular culture since the defeat of the Axis Powers in World War II.

===Fascism as a form of tyranny===
One of the most common and strongest criticisms of fascism is that it is a tyranny in practice.  

Fascism is commonly regarded as deliberately and entirely non-democratic and anti-democratic.    Scholar on democracy, Anthony Arblaster has recorded fascists policy claim about the ideology supporting a form of democracy, but Arblaster regards the claim as a deliberate lie and empty rhetoric, claiming that fascism never intended to put such claims of democracy into practice, and thus he categorizes fascism as non-democratic and anti-democratic in practice. Anthony Arblaster. "Democracy", Concepts in social thought.Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA: University of Minnesota Press, 1994. Pp. 48.  

However, some scholars have rebuked this common critical view. Walter Laqueur says that fascists "would not necessarily accept the label of anti-democratic. In fact many of them argued that they were fighting for a purer and more genuine democracy in which the participation of the individual in politics would not be mediated by professional politicians, clerical influences, the availability of the mass media, but through personal, almost full time involvement in a political movement and through identification with the leader who would represent the feelings and sentiments of the whole people."  
 corporatist representation of state-sanctioned corporate groups.  It was claimed that this system would unite people into interest groups to address the state that would act in the interest of the general will of the nation and thus exercise an orderly form of popular rule.  Riley notes that fascists argued that this authoritarian democracy is capable of representing the different interests of society that advise the state and the state acts in the interest of the nation. Dylan J. Riley. The civic foundations of fascism in Europe: Italy, Spain, and Romania, 18701945. Pp. 4.  Riley also notes that in contrast, fascists denounced liberal democracy for not being a true democracy but in fact being un-democratic because from the fascist perspective, elections and parliaments are unable to represent the interests of the nation because it lumps together individuals who have little in common into geographical districts to vote for an array of parties to represent them that results in little unanimity in terms of interests, projects, or intentions, and that liberal democracys multi-party elections merely serve as a means to legitimize elite rule without addressing the interests of the general will of the nation. 

===Unprincipled opportunism===
A common criticism of the original version of fascism, Italian Fascism, has been the accusation that much of the ideology was merely a by-product of unprincipled   who became a personal friend and admirer of Mussolini and worked with Mussolini to translate and write an English language autobiography; directly addressed the issue of opportunism in Mussolinis behaviour in the preface of the English language autobiography of Mussolini. Benito Mussolini. My Rise And Fall, Volumes 1-2. Da Capo Press edition. Da Capo Press, 1998. Pp. ix. (Note: Mussolini wrote the second volume about his fall from power as head of government of the Kingdom of Italy in 1943, though he was restored to power in northern Italy by the German military.)  Child said "Opportunist is a term of reproach used to brand men who fit themselves to conditions for the reasons of self-interest. Mussolini, as I have learned to know him, is an opportunist in the sense that he believed that mankind itself must be fitted to changing conditions rather than to fixed theories, no matter how many hopes and prayers have been expended on theories and programmes.".  Child quoted Mussolini as saying, "The sanctity of an ism is not in the ism; it has no sanctity beyond its power to do, to work, to succeed in practice. It may have succeeded yesterday and fail to-morrow. Failed yesterday and succeed to-morrow. The machine first of all must run!". 
 Ansaldo (an Sir Samuel Hoare.    However such criticism has been challenged even by Mussolinis socialist critics at the time who noted that regardless of the financial support he accepted for his pro-interventionist stance, that Mussolini was free to write whatever he wished in his newspaper Il Popolo dItalia, without prior sanctioning by his financial backers.  Furthermore, the major source that Mussolini and the Fascist movement received in World War I was not from capitalists who sought to use Mussolinis new movement, but rather it came from France and is widely believed to have come from French socialists who supported the French governments war against Germany and were sending support to Italian socialists who wanted Italian intervention on Frances side.  
 sociologist Vilfredo Pareto. Mediterranean Fascism by Charles F. Delzel page 96  Sorels emphasis on the need for overthrowing decadent liberal democracy and capitalism by the use of violence, direct action, the general strike, and the use of Machiavellianism|neo-Machiavellian appeals to emotion, impressed Mussolini deeply. Mediterranean Fascism 19191945 Edited by Charles F. Delzel, Harper Rowe 1970, page 3  His use of Nietzsche made him a highly unorthodox socialist, due to Nietzsches promotion of elitism and anti-egalitarian views.  Prior to World War I, Mussolinis writings over time indicated that he had abandoned Marxism and egalitarianism that he had previously supported, in favour of Nietzsches bermensch concept and anti-egalitarianism.  In 1908, Mussolini wrote a short essay called "Philosophy of Strength" based on his Nietzschean influence, in which Mussolini openly spoke fondly of the ramifications of an impending war in Europe in challenging both religion and nihilism, saying:
 

===Ideological dishonesty===
Fascism has been criticized for being ideologically dishonest. 

Major examples of ideological dishonesty have been identified in Italian Fascisms changing relationship with German Nazism. Aaron Gillette. Racial Theories in Fascist Italy. London, England, UK; New York, New York, USA: Routledge, 2001. Pp. 17.  John Pollard. The Fascist Experience in Italy. Routledge, 1998. Pp. 129.  Fascist Italys official foreign policy positions were known to commonly utilize rhetorical ideological hyperbole to justify its actions, although during Dino Grandis tenure as Italys foreign minister, the country engaged in realpolitik free of such fascist hyperbole.  Italian Fascisms stance towards German Nazism fluctuated from support from the late 1920s to 1934 involving praising Hitlers rise to power and meeting with Hitler in 1934; to opposition from 1934 to 1936 after the assassination of Italys ally leader in Austria, Engelbert Dollfuss by Nazis in Austria; and again back to support after 1936 when Germany was the only significant power that did not denounce Italys invasion and occupation of Ethiopia.

Upon antagonism exploding between Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy over the assassination of Austrian Chancellor Dollfuss in 1934, Mussolini and Italian Fascists denounced and ridiculed Nazisms racial theories, particularly by denouncing its Nordic race|Nordicism, while promoting Mediterranean race|Mediterraneanism.  Mussolini himself responded to Nordicists claims of Italy being divided into Nordic and Mediterranean racial areas due to Germanic invasions of Northern Italy, by claiming that while Germanic tribes such as the Lombards took control of Italy after the fall of ancient Rome, that they arrived in small numbers of about 8,000 and quickly assimilated into Roman culture and spoke the Latin language within fifty years.  Italian Fascism was influenced by the tradition of Italian nationalists scornfully looking down upon Nordicists claims, and taking pride in comparing the age and sophistication of ancient Roman civilization as well as the classical revival in the Renaissance, to that of Nordic societies that Italian nationalists described as "newcomers" to civilization in comparison.  At the height of antagonism between the Nazis and Italian Fascists over race, Mussolini claimed that the Germans themselves were not a pure race and noted with irony that Nazi theory on German superiority was based on the theory of non-German foreigners, such as Frenchman Arthur de Gobineau.  However after German-Italian relations reduced in tension in the late 1930s, Italian Fascism sought to harmonize its ideology with German Nazism and combined Nordicist and Mediterranean racial theories, noting that Italians were members of the Aryan Race of a mixed Nordic-Mediterranean subtype.  

Mussolini declared in 1938 that Italian Fascism had always been antisemitic, upon Italy adopting antisemitic laws in 1938.  When in fact Italian Fascism did not endorse antisemitism until the late 1930s when Mussolini feared alienating antisemitic Nazi Germany whose power and influence was growing in Europe, prior to then there had been notable Jewish Italians who had been senior Italian Fascist officials prior to this, including Margherita Sarfatti, who had also been Mussolinis mistress.  Also, contrary to Mussolinis claim in 1938, only a small number of Italian Fascists were staunchly antisemitic such as Roberto Farinacci and Giuseppe Preziosi while other members, such as Italo Balbo who came from Ferrara, which had one of Italys largest Jewish communities, were disgusted with the antisemitic laws and opposed them.  However fascism scholar Mark Neocleous notes that while Italian Fascism did not have a clear commitment to antisemitism, there were occasional antisemitic statements issued prior to 1938, such as Mussolini in 1919 declaring that the Jewish bankers in London and New York were connected by race to the Russian Bolsheviks, and claimed that eight percent of the Russian Bolsheviks were Jews. 

== See also ==
 

==References==

===Notes===
{{reflist|colwidth=30em|refs=
 Stanislav Andreski, Wars, Revolutions, Dictatorships, Routledge 1992, p. 64  -->

 Ali Abdullatif Ahmida. The making of modern Libya: state formation, colonization, and resistance, 18301922. Albany, New York, US: State University of New York Press, 1994. pp. 134135. 

 Andrew Hewitt. Fascist modernism: aesthetics, politics, and the avant-garde. Stanford, California, USA: Stanford University Press, 1993. Pp. 153. 

 Falasca-Zamponi, Simonetta. Fascist Spectacle: The Aesthetics of Power in Mussolinis Italy. University of California Press, 2000. p. 137.  -->

 Griffin, Roger: "The Palingenetic Core of Fascism", Che cos il fascismo? Interpretazioni e prospettive di ricerche, Ideazione editrice, Rome, 2003   

 Anthony James Gregor. Young Mussolini and the intellectual origins of fascism. Berkeley and Los Angeles, California, US; London, England, UK: University of California Press, 1979. p. 196. 

  , accessed April 29, 2012.  -->

   

 Robert O. Paxton. The Anatomy of Fascism. First Vintage Books Edition. New York, New York, USA: Vintage Books, 2005. pp. 144.  -->

 Aristotle A. Kallis. The fascism reader. New York, New York, USA: Routledge, 2003. Pp. 71 

 Kallis, Aristotle, ed. (2003). The Fascism Reader, London: Routledge, pages 8485. 

 The Fascism Reader by Aristotle A. Kallis.  -->

 Kallis, Aristotle, ed. (2003). The Fascism Reader, London: Routledge, pp. 391395. 

 Turner, Henry Ashby, Reappraisals of Fascism. New Viewpoints, 1975. p. 162. States fascisms "goals of radical and authoritarian nationalism". 

 Larsen, Stein Ugelvik, Bernt Hagtvet and Jan Petter Myklebust, Who were the Fascists: Social Roots of European Fascism, p. 424, "organized form of integrative radical nationalist authoritarianism" 

 Benito Mussolini. Fascism: Doctrine and Institutions. (Rome, Italy: Ardita Publishers, 1935) p. 26. "We are free to believe that this is the century of authority, a century tending to the right, a fascist century." 

 Hppauf, Bernd-Rdiger War, Violence, and the Modern Condition (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1997), p. 92. 

 Blamires, Cyprian, World Fascism: a Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1 (Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2006) p.&nbsp;188189. 

 Blamires, Cyprian, World Fascism: a Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1 (Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2006) p.&nbsp;418419.  -->

 Blamires, Cyprian, World Fascism: a Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1 (Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2006) p. 507.  -->

 Blamires, Cyprian, World Fascism: a Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1 (Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2006) p. 512. 

 Blamires, Cyprian, World Fascism: a Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1 (Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2006) p.&nbsp;8284. 

 Blamires, Cyprian, World Fascism: a Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1 (Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2006) p.&nbsp;9596. 

 name="Blamires, Cyprian 2006 pp.&nbsp;140141"  -->

 Arthur Schweitzer, "Big Business in the Third Reich", Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 1964, p. 288  -->

 Arthur Schweitzer, Big Business in the Third Reich, Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 1964, p. 269  -->

 Counts, George Sylvester, Bolshevism, Fascism, and Capitalism: an Account of the Three Economic Systems, 3rd ed. (Yale University Press, 1970). pp. 96  -->

 Welch, David. Modern European History, 18712000.  . (Speaks of fascism opposing capitalism for creating class conflict and communism for exploiting class conflict).  -->

   

 Roger Griffin,  , Chapter published in Alessandro Campi (ed.), Che cos il fascismo? Interpretazioni e prospettive di ricerche, Ideazione editrice, Roma, 2003, pp. 97122. 

 Cyprian Blamires, Paul Jackson. World fascism: a historical encyclopedia, Volume 1. Santa Barbara, California, US: ABC-CLIO, 2006. p. 150. 

 Cyprian Blamires, Paul Jackson. World fascism: a historical encyclopedia, Volume 1. Santa Barbara, California, US: ABC-CLIO, 2006. p. 189. 

 Social Policy in the Third Reich. The Working Class and the National Community&nbsp; Mason, T.W., Oxford: Berg. 1993, p. 160 

 Bhushan, Vidya, Comparative Politics, 3rd ed. (New Delhi, India: Atlantic Publishers, 2006) p. 208.  -->

 Herbert Kitschelt, Anthony J. McGann. The Radical Right in Western Europe: a comparative analysis. 1996 University of Michigan Press. p. 30  -->

 Joan Campbell. European labor unions. Wesport, Connecticut, USA: Greenwood Press, 1992. Pp. 164.  -->

 Dahlia S. Elazar. The making of fascism: class, state, and counter-revolution, Italy 19191922. Westport, Connecticut, US: Praeger Publishers, 2001. p. 73 

 Larry Eugene Jones, James N. Retallack. Between reform, reaction, and resistance: studies in the history of German conservatism from 1789 to 1945. Berg, 1993. Pp. 20.  -->

 Fascists and conservatives: the radical right and the establishment in twentieth-century Europe. Routdlege, 1990. p. 14. 

 Martin Blinkhorn. Fascists and Conservatives. 2nd edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 2001 p. 22. 

 Italian: Lo Stato corporativo considera liniziativa privata, nel campo della produzione, come lo strumento pi utile ed efficiente della Nazione.  -->

 Cyprian Blamires, Paul Jackson. World fascism: a historical encyclopedia, Volume 1. Santa Barbara, California, US: ABC-CLIO, 2006. p. 72. 

   

 David Jablonsky. The Nazi Party in dissolution: Hitler and the Verbotzeit, 19231925. London, England, UK; Totowa, New Jersey, US: Frank Cass and Company Ltd., 1989. pp. 2026, 30 

 Domarus, Hitler II. 251252  -->

 Howard M. Sachar. Dreamland: Europeans and Jews in the Aftermath of the Great War. Random House Digital, Inc., 2003. Pp. 295.  -->

 Eatwell, Roger, Fascism: a History (Allen Lane, 1996) pp. 215. 

 Griffen, Roger; Feldman, Matthew. Fascism: Critical Concepts. p. 353. "When the Russian revolution occurred in 1917 and the Democratic revolution spread after the First World War, anti-bolshevism and anti-egalitarianism rose as very strong "restoration movements" on the European scene. However, by the turn of that century no one could predict that fascism would become such a concrete, political reaction&nbsp;..." 

 Blamires, Cyprian, World Fascism: a Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1 (Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2006) p.&nbsp;140141, 670. 

 Adam Kuper, Jessica Kuper. The Social Science Encyclopedia, Volume I, A-K, 3rd ed. (Routledge, 2004) pp. 349.  -->

 Blamires, Cyprian, World Fascism: a Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1 (Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2006) p.&nbsp;170171.  -->

 Cyprian Blamires, Paul Jackson. World fascism: a historical encyclopedia, Volume 1. Santa Barbara, California, US: ABC-CLIO, 2006. p. 190. 

 Eatwell, Roger: "A Spectral-Syncretic Approach to Fascism, The Fascism Reader (Routledge, 2003) pp. 7180   

 Eatwell, Roger: "A Spectral-Syncretic Approach to Fascism, The Fascism Reader, Routledge, 2003 pp. 7180   

 Mussolini, Benito; Schnapp, Jeffery Thompson (ed.); Sears, Olivia E. (ed.); Stampino, Maria G. (ed.). "Address to the National Corporative Council (14 November 1933) and Senate Speech on the Bill Establishing the Corporations (abridged; 13 January 1934)". A Primer of Italian Fascism. University of Nebraska Press, 2000. p. 158.  -->

 Eugene Davidson. The Unmaking of Adolf Hitler. Columbia, Missouri, USA: University of Missouri Press, 2004 Pp.&nbsp;371372. 

 Evans, p. 299  -->

 Evans, pp. 491492 

 Evans, pp. 331332 

 Evans, p. 529 

 Aristotle A. Kallis. Fascist ideology: territory and expansionism in Italy and Germany, 19221945. London, England, UK: Routledge, 2000. p. 132. 

 Aristotle A. Kallis. Fascist ideology: territory and expansionism in Italy and Germany, 19221945. New York, New York, US: Routledge, 2001. Pp. 51. 

 Aristotle A. Kallis. Fascist ideology: territory and expansionism in Italy and Germany, 19221945. New York, New York, US: Routledge, 2001. Pp. 53. 

 Kallis, Aristotle, Fascist Ideology: Territory and Expansionism in Italy and Germany, 19221945 (New York: Routledge, 2000) pp.&nbsp;3940.  -->

 Pollard, John Francis, The Fascist Experience in Italy, p. 80 Routledge 1998 

 Baumslag, Naomi and Edmund D. Pellgrino, Murderous Medicine: Nazi Doctors, Human Experimentation, and Typhus (Greenwood Publishing Group, 2005) p. 37.  -->

   

 Stuart Joseph Woolf. Fascism in Europe. 3rd Edition. Taylor & Francis, 1983. Pp. 311. 

 Allen, Ann Taylor, Review of Dagmar Herzog, Sex after Fascism January 2006 

 De Grand, Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, pp. 4851.  -->

   

    -->

 Falasca-Zamponi, Simonetta. Fascist Spectacle: The Aesthetics of Power in Mussolinis Italy. University of California Press, 2000. p. 136.  -->

 De Grand, Alexander. Italian fascism: its origins and development. 3rd ed. University of Nebraska Press, 2000. p. 145. 

 Gnter Berghaus. Fascism and theatre: comparative studies on the aesthetics and politics of performance. Berkeley and Los Angeles, California, US: University of California Press, 2000. pp. 136137 

   

 Mussolini quoted in: Gentile, Emilio. The origins of Fascist ideology, 19181925. Enigma Books, 2005. p. 205 

 Gori, Gigliola. Italian Fascism and the Female Body: Sport, Submissive Women and Strong Mothers (Routledge, 2004) p. 145.  -->

 Gori, Gigliola. Italian Fascism and the Female Body: Sport, Submissive Women and Strong Mothers (Routledge, 2004) p. 58  -->

 Giuseppe Caforio. "Handbook of the sociology of the military", Handbooks of Sociology and Social Research. New York, New York, USA: Springer, 2006. Pp. 12. 

 Gri, Joseph. Ethics and Political Theory (Lanham, Maryland: University of America, Inc, 2000) p. 120 

 Griffin, Roger and Matthew Feldman   pp. 420421, 2004 Taylor and Francis. 

 Eatwell, Roger: "A Spectral-Syncretic Approach to Fascism", The Fascism Reader, Routledge, 2003, p 79.   

<!-- Unused citations
 Harmon, Christopher C., Terrorism Today (Routledge, 2000) ISBN 978-0-7146-4998-6   "a final indicator of the amibiguity between left and right extremes is that many militants switch sides, including the very founder of fascism, Benito Mussolini" 
-->

 Ebenstein, William. 1964. Todays Isms: Communism, Fascism, Capitalism, and Socialism. Prentice Hall (original from the University of Michigan). p. 178.    -->

 Stackelberg, Roderick  , Routledge, 1999, pp.&nbsp;46 

 Kershaw, Ian. 2000. Hitler, 18891936: Hubris. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 442.    -->

 Bollas, Christopher. 1993. Being a Character: Psychoanalysis and Self-Experience. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-08815-2. p. 205.   Speaks of Italian Fascism supporting war and opposing pacifism.  -->

 Linz, Juan Jos. 2000. Totalitarian and Authoritarian Regimes: with a major new introduction. Lynne Rienner Publishers. p. 7.    -->

 Gentile, Emilio. The Struggle for Modernity: Nationalism, Futurism, and Fascism. p. 86.    -->

 Knight, Patricia  , p. 72, Routledge, 2003.  -->

 Payne, Stanley G. 1996. A History of Fascism, 19141945. Routledge   

 Griffin, Roger and Matthew Feldma  , 2004 Taylor and Francis  -->

 Gottlieb, Julie V. and Thomas P. Linehan, p. 93.  -->

 Griffen, Roger (editor). Chapter 8: "Extremism of the Centre"&nbsp; by Seymour Martin Lipset. International Fascism: Theories, Causes and the New Consensus. Arnold Readers. p. 101.  -->

 Griffin, Roger. The Nature of Fascism (New York: St. Martins Press, 1991) pp. 222223. 

 Griffin, The Nature of Fascism, pp.&nbsp;1502 

 Guillebaud, Claude W. 1939. The Economic Recovery of Germany 19331938. London: MacMillan and Co. Limited.  -->

 "From inside Europe" by John Gunther. This generation: a selection of British and American literature from 1914 to the present. Scott, Foresman, 1939. Pp. 640.  -->

 Lee, Stephen J. (1996), Weimar and Nazi Germany, Harcourt Heinemann, page 28  -->

 Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, pp. 2728 

 Hawkins, Mike. Social Darwinism in European and American Thought, 18601945: Nature as Model and Nature as Threat. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997. p. 285.  -->

 Griffin, Roger, "The Post-fascism of the Alleanza Nazionale: a Case-study in Ideological Morphology" in Journal of Political Ideologies, Vol. 1, No. 2, 1996  -->

 Vincent, Andrew. Modern Political Ideologies. 3rd edition. John Wiley & Sons, 2009. pp. 158159.  -->

 Vincent, Andrew. Modern Political Ideologies. 3rd edition. John Wiley & Sons, 2009. p. 160.  -->

  , 2003, International Herald Tribune  -->

   

 Mussolini, Benito. 1935. Fascism: Doctrine and Institutions. Rome: Ardita Publishers. p 14. 

 Anthony James Gregor. Young Mussolini and the intellectual origins of fascism. Berkeley and Los Angeles, California, US; London, England, UK: University of California Press, 1979. pp. 195196. 

 Gregor. Mussolinis Intellectuals: Fascist Social and Political Thought, Princeton University Press, 2005 ISBN 0-691-12009-9 p. 4 

   

   

 Sternhell, Zeev, "Crisis of Fin-de-sicle Thought" in Griffin, Roger, ed., International Fascism: Theories, Causes and the New Consensus (London and New York, 1998) p. 169. 

 Schnapp, Jeffrey Thompson, Olivia E. Sears and Maria G. Stampino, A Primer of Italian Fascism (University of Nebraska Press, 2000) p. 57, "We are free to believe that this is the century of authority, a century tending to the right, a fascist century," 

 "Goebbels on National-Socialism, Bolshevism and Democracy, Documents on International Affairs, vol. II, 1938, pp. 1719. Accessed from the Jewish Virtual Library on February 5, 2009.   Joseph Goebbels describes the Nazis as being allied with countries which had "authoritarian nationalist" ideology and conception of the state.  -->

 Paul OBrien. Mussolini in the First World War: The Journalist, The Soldier, The Fascist. Pp. 52. 

 Horst, Junginger, The Study of Religion Under the Impact of Fascism vol. 117 of Numen Book Series (BRILL, 2008) p. 273. 

 Ian Kershaw. Hitler, 18891936: hubris. New York, New York, US; London, England, UK: W. W. Norton & Company, 2000. p. 182. 

 Knight, Patricia, Mussolini and Fascism, p. 72, Routledge, 2003. 

 Stanislao G. Pugliese. Fascism, anti-fascism, and the resistance in Italy: 1919 to the present. Oxford, England, UK: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2004. 4344. 

 Stanislao G. Pugliese. Fascism, anti-fascism, and the resistance in Italy: 1919 to the present. Oxford, England, UK: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2004. pp. 4344. 

 MacGregor Knox. Mussolini Unleashed, 19391941: Politics and Strategy in Italys Last War. Pp.&nbsp;6364. 

 MacGregor Knox. Mussolini Unleashed, 19391941: Politics and Strategy in Italys Last War. Pp. 63.  -->

 Kitchen, Martin, A History of Modern Germany, 18002000 (Malden, Massaschussetts, USA; Oxford, England, UK; Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Publishing, Inc., 2006),p. 205. 

 Borsella, Cristogianni and Adolph Caso. Fascist Italy: A Concise Historical Narrative (Wellesley, Massachusetts: Branden Books, 2007) p. 76. 

 Cristogianni Borsella, Adolph Caso. Fascist Italy: A Concise Historical Narrative. Wellesley, Massachusetts, US: Branden Books, 2007. p. 69. 

 Cristogianni Borsella, Adolph Caso. Fascist Italy: A Concise Historical Narrative. Wellesley, Massachusetts, US: Branden Books, 2007. pp. 6970. 

 Cristogianni Borsella, Adolph Caso. Fascist Italy: A Concise Historical Narrative. Wellesley, Massachusetts, US: Branden Books, 2007. p. 70. 

 Cristogianni Borsella, Adolph Caso. Fascist Italy: A Concise Historical Narrative. Wellesley, Massachusetts, US: Branden Books, 2007. p. 73. 

 Cristogianni Borsella, Adolph Caso. Fascist Italy: A Concise Historical Narrative. Wellesley, Massachusetts, US: Branden Books, 2007. p. 75. 

 Cristogianni Borsella, Adolph Caso. Fascist Italy: A Concise Historical Narrative. Wellesley, Massachusetts, US: Branden Books, 2007. p. 72. 

 Cristogianni Borsella, Adolph Caso. Fascist Italy: A Concise Historical Narrative. Wellesley, Massachusetts, US: Branden Books, 2007. p. 76. 

 Matthew Lange. Antisemitic anticapitalism in German culture from 1850 to 1933. University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2006. Pp. 224.  -->

 Matthews, Claudio. Fascism Is Not Dead&nbsp;..., Nations Business, 1946. 

 Mussolini, Benito; Schnapp, Jeffery Thompson (ed.); Sears, Olivia E. (ed.); Stampino, Maria G. (ed.). "Address to the National Corporative Council (14 November 1933) and Senate Speech on the Bill Establishing the Corporations (abridged; 13 January 1934)". A Primer of Italian Fascism. (University of Nebraska Press, 2000) pp. 158159.  -->

 Blinkhorn, Martin, Mussolini and Fascist Italy. 2nd ed. (New York: Routledge, 2003) p. 9. 

 McDonald (1999) p. 27.  -->

   

 Hoover, J. Edgar.  , 1947. 

 Neocleous, Mark, Fascism (Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota University Press, 1997) pp.&nbsp;2122. 

 Neocleous, Mark. Fascism. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997. p. 47.  -->

 Neocleous, Mark. Fascism. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997. p. 49.  -->

 Mark Antliff. Avant-garde fascism: the mobilization of myth, art, and culture in France, 19091939. Duke University Press, 2007. Pp. 75. 

 Mark Antliff. Avant-garde fascism: the mobilization of myth, art, and culture in France, 19091939. Duke University Press, 2007. Pp.&nbsp;7581. 

 Mark Antliff. Avant-garde fascism: the mobilization of myth, art, and culture in France, 19091939. Duke University Press, 2007. Pp. 81. 

 Mark Antliff. Avant-garde fascism: the mobilization of myth, art, and culture in France, 19091939. Duke University Press, 2007. Pp. 77. 

 Mark Antliff. Avant-garde fascism: the mobilization of myth, art, and culture in France, 19091939. Duke University Press, 2007. Pp. 82. 

   

 Allen, Ann Taylor,   H-German, H-Net Reviews, January 2006 

 Douglas R. Holmes. Integral Europe: fast-capitalism, multiculturalism, neofascism. Princeton, New Jersey, US: Princeton University Press, 2000. Pp. 60. 

 Anthony L. Cardoza. Benito Mussolini: the first fascist. Pearson Longman, 2006 Pp. 109. 

 McDonald, Harmish, Mussolini and Italian Fascism (Nelson Thornes, 1999) p. 27. 

 Patricia Knight, Mussolini and Fascism, Routledge (UK), ISBN 0-415-27921-6, p. 65  -->

 Benito Mussolini, Richard Washburn Child, Max Ascoli, Richard Lamb. My rise and fall. Da Capo Press, 1998. p. 26.  -->

 David Carroll. French Literary Fascism: Nationalism, Anti-Semitism, and the Ideology of Culture. Pp. 92. 

 David Carroll. French Literary Fascism: Nationalism, Anti-Semitism, and the Ideology of Culture. Pp. 92. 

 Gentile, Emilio, The Struggle for Modernity: Nationalism, Futurism, and Fascism (Westport, Connecticut: Praeger Publishers, 2003) p. 6. 

 Oliver Zimmer, Nationalism in Europe, 18901940 (London, Palgrave, 2003), chapter 4, pp. 80107. 

 Volovici, Nationalist Ideology, p. 98, citing N. Cainic, Ortodoxie i etnocraie, pp. 162164.  -->

   

 James A. Gregor, The Search for Neofascism: The Use and Abuse of Social Science, Cambridge University Press, 2006, p. 7  -->

 Miranda Carter. George, Nicholas and Wilhelm: Three Royal Cousins and the Road to World War I. Borzoi Book, 2009. Pp. 420.  -->

 Neocleous, Mark, Fascism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997) p. 54. 

 Neocleous, Mark, Fascism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997) p. 58. 

 Oliver H. Woshinsky. Explaining Politics: Culture, Institutions, and Political Behavior. Oxon, England, UK; New York, New York, USA: Routledge, 2008.Pp. 156. 

 de Grazia, Victoria. The Culture of Consent: Mass Organizations of Leisure in Fascist Italy. Cambridge, 1981. 

   

   

   

 Kevin Passmore, Women, Gender and Fascism in Europe, p. 116 

 Kevin Passmore Women, Gender and Fascism, p. 16  -->

 Pauley, 2003. 117119. 

 Pauley, pp. 113114 

 Pauley, p. 113 

 Pauley. 2003. pp. 72, 84.  -->

 Pauley. 2003. p. 85.  -->

 Pauley. 2003. p. 86.  -->

   

  . Vol. 39, No. 4, Special Issue: Collective Memory, pp.&nbsp;503529  -->

   

 Peter Neville. Mussolini. Oxon, England, UK; New York, New York, USA: Routledge, 2004. Pp. 36. 

   

 Philip Morgan, Fascism in Europe, 19191945, Taylor & Francis, 2003, p. 168. ISBN 0-415-16943-7  -->

 David Baker, "The political economy of fascism: Myth or reality, or myth and reality?", New Political Economy, Volume 11, Issue 2 June 2006 , pp. 227250.  -->

 Renton, David. Fascism: Theory and Practice, p. 21, London: Pluto Press, 1999. 

 Payne, Stanley G. A History of Fascism, 19141945. Routledge, 1996. pp. 485486. 

 Bollas, Christopher, Being a Character: Psychoanalysis and Self-Experience (Routledge, 1993) ISBN 978-0-415-08815-2, p. 205. 

 Jens Rydgren. Movements of exclusion: radical right-wing populism in the Western world. Hauppauge, New York, USA: Nova Publishers, 2005. Pp. 6.  -->

 McLaren, Angus, Twentieth-Century Sexuality p. 139 Blackwell Publishing 1999 

 Schachter, Gustav; Engelbourg, Saul. 2005. Cultural Continuity In Advanced Economies: Britain And The U.S. Versus Continental Europe. Published by Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.  .  -->

 Quarantotto, Claudio. Tutti Fascisti, 1976. 

   

   

 Robert Eccleshall, Vincent Geoghegan, Richard Jay, Michael Kenny, Iain Mackenzie, Rick Wilford. Political Ideologies: an introduction. 2nd ed. Routledge, 1994. p. 208.  -->

 Richard Allen Epstein, Principles for a Free Society: Reconciling Individual Liberty With the Common Good, De Capo Press 2002, p. 168  -->

 Rimlinger, G.V. "Social Policy Under German Fascism" in   by Martin Rein, Gosta Esping-Andersen, and Lee Rainwater, p. 61, M.E. Sharpe, 1987.  -->

 Alessandra Kersevan 2008: (Editor) Foibe - Revisionismo di stato e amnesie della repubblica. Kappa Vu. Udine.  -->

 Sternhell, Zeev, Mario Sznajder and Maia Ashri, The Birth of Fascist Ideology: From Cultural Rebellion to Political Revolution (Princeton University Press, 1994) p. 32. 

 Zeev Sternhell, Mario Sznajder, Maia Ashri. The Birth of Fascist Ideology: From Cultural Rebellion to Political Revolution. Princeton, New Jersey, US: Princeton University Press, 1994. Pp. 82. 

 Zeev Sternhell, Mario Sznajder, Maia Ashri. The birth of fascist ideology: from cultural rebellion to political revolution. Princeton University Press, 1994. pp. 173, 175. 

 Zeev Sternhell, Mario Sznajder, Maia Ashri. The birth of fascist ideology: from cultural rebellion to political revolution. Princeton University Press, 1994. p. 214. 

 Zeev Sternhell, Mario Sznajder, Maia Ashri. The birth of fascist ideology: from cultural rebellion to political revolution. Princeton University Press, 1994. p. 178. 

 Zeev Sternhell, Mario Sznajder, Maia Ashri. The birth of fascist ideology: from cultural rebellion to political revolution. Princeton University Press, 1994. p. 186. 

 Zeev Sternhell, Mario Sznajder, Maia Ashri. The birth of fascist ideology: from cultural rebellion to political revolution. Princeton University Press, 1994. p. 187. 

 Zeev Sternhell, Mario Sznajder, Maia Ashri. The birth of fascist ideology: from cultural rebellion to political revolution. Princeton University Press, 1994. p. 190. 

 Roger Griffin, Matthew Feldman. Fascism: The nature of fascism. Routledge, 2004. p. 231. 

 Robert O. Paxton. The Anatomy of Fascism. New York, New York, US; Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Random House, Inc., 2005 p. 87. 

 Robert O. Paxton. The Anatomy of Fascism. New York, New York, US; Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Random House, Inc., 2005 p. 88. 

 Robert O. Paxton. The Anatomy of Fascism. New York, New York, US; Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Random House, Inc., 2005 p. 90. 

 Hunt, Lynn, Thomas R. Martin, Barbara H. Rosenwein, R. Po-chia Hsia, and Bonnie G. Smith. The Making of the West: Peoples and Cultures. 2nd ed. Vol. C. Boston: Bedford St. Martins, 2005. p. 1064.  -->

 Mosse, G: "Toward a General Theory of Fascism", Fascism, ed. Griffin (Routeledge) 2003 

 Griffin, Roger and Matthew Feldman, eds., Fascism: Fascism and Culture (London and New York: Routledge, 2004) p. 185. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 1995, 2005. Pp.&nbsp;2324. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 1995, 2005. Pp. 24. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 1995, 2005. Pp. 29. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 1995, 2005. Pp.&nbsp;2425. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 1995, 2005. Pp. 25. 

 Peter Davies, Derek Lynch. The Routledge companion to fascism and the far right. London, England, UK; New York, New York, USA: Routledge. Pp. 94.  -->

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 2005. p. 115. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 2005. pp. 119120. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital Printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 2005. p. 270. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital Printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 2005. pp. 282288. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital Printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 2005. p. 145. 

 Stanley G. Payne, A History of Fascism: 19141945, London: Routledge, 2001, pp. 341342. 

 Durham, Martin, Women and Fascism (Routledge, 1998) p. 15. 

 The Routledge Companion to Fascism and the Far Right (2002) by Peter Jonathan Davies and Derek Lynch, Routledge (UK), ISBN 0-415-21494-7 p. 143.  -->

 Payne, Stanley (1996). A History of Fascism. Routledge. ISBN 1-85728-595-6 p.10  -->

 Peter Davies, Derek Lynch. The Routledge Companion to Fascism and the Far Right. Routledge, 2002. p. 103  -->

 Salvemini. Pp. 134.  -->

 Salvemini, Gaetano.Under the Axe of Fascism. READ BOOKS, 2006. Pp. 134.  -->

 Griffen, Roger (ed). 1995. "The Legal Basis of the Total State"&nbsp; by Carl Schmitt. Fascism. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 72. 

 Griffen, Roger (ed). 1995. "The Need for a Totalitarian Japan"&nbsp; by Nakano Seigo. Fascism. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 239.  -->

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 2005. p. 110. 

 Payne, Stanley G. A History of Fascism, 19141945. (Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 2001) p. 112. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 2005. p. 113. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 2005. p. 114. 

 Moishe Postone|Postone, Moishe. 1986. "Anti-Semitism and National Socialism." Germans and Jews Since the Holocaust: The Changing Situation in West Germany, ed. Anson Rabinbach and Jack Zipes. New York: Homes & Meier.  -->

 Turner, Stephen P., Ksler, Dirk: Sociology Responds to Fascism, Routledge. 2004, p. 222 

 "Barres and Fascism" by Robert Soucy, French Historical Studies , Vol. 5, No. 1 (Spring, 1967), pp.&nbsp;6797. Duke University Press. Article Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/285867. Pp.&nbsp;8790  -->

 Stackleberg, Rodney  , Routeledge, 1999, pp.&nbsp;35. 

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 2005. p. 46.  -->

 Stanley G. Payne. A history of fascism, 19141945. Digital printing edition. Oxon, England, UK: Routledge, 1995, 2005. Pp. 517. 

 Sternhell, Zeev, Mario Sznajder and Maia Ashri, The Birth of Fascist Ideology: From Cultural Rebellion to Political Revolution (Princeton University Press, 1994) p. 78. 

 Sternhell, Zeev, "Crisis of Fin-de-sicle Thought" in Griffin, Roger, ed., International Fascism: Theories, Causes and the New Consensus (London and New York, 1998) p. 170. 

 Stuart Joseph Woolf. European fascism. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1970. Pp. 282. 

 Gori, Gigliola. Italian Fascism and the Female Body: Sport, Submissive Women and Strong Mothers (Routledge, 2004) pp. 144145.  -->

   

   

 Rohkrmer, Thomas, "A Single Communal Faith?: the German Right from Conservatism to National Socialism", Monographs in German History. Volume 20 (Berghahn Books, 2007), p. 130 

   

 Tracy H. Koon. Believe, obey, fight: political socialization of youth in fascist Italy, 19221943. University of North Carolina Press, 1985. Pp. 6. 

 Curtis, Michel (1971). People and Politics in the Middle East. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 0-87855-500-5. Pp.&nbsp;132138. 

 Roger Griffin. Fascism. Oxford, England, UK: Oxford University Press, 1995. Pp. 8, 307. 

 Hawkins, Mike. Social Darwinism in European and American Thought, 18601945: Nature as Model and Nature as Threat. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997. p. 285. "Conflict is in fact the basic