 
 
  or soccer, Australian rules football, International rules football, rugby union, rugby league, and American football.]]
 sports that kicking a ball with the foot to score a Goal (sport)|goal. The most popular of these sports worldwide is association football, more commonly known as just "football" or "soccer". Unqualified, the word Football (word)|football applies to whichever form of football is the most popular in the regional context in which the word appears, including association football, as well as American football, Australian rules football, Canadian football, Gaelic football, rugby league, rugby union,   and other related games. These variations of football are known as football codes.

Various forms of football can be identified in history, often as popular   was founded in England, becoming the first of many professional football competitions. During the twentieth century, the various codes of football became amongst the most popular team sports in the world. 

 

== Common elements ==
The various codes of football share the following common elements :
* Two teams of usually between 11 and 18 players; some variations that have fewer players (five or more per team) are also popular.
* A clearly defined area in which to play the game.
* Score (sport)|Scoring goal (sport)|goals or points, by moving the ball to an opposing teams end of the field and either into a goal area, or over a line.
* Goals or points resulting from players putting the ball between two goalposts.
* The goal or line being defended by the opposing team.
* Players being required to move the balldepending on the codeby kicking, carrying, or hand-passing the ball.
* Players using only their body to move the ball.
 mark or make a fair catch.

Peoples from around the world have played games which involved kicking or carrying a ball, since ancient times. However, most of the modern codes of football have their origins in  England. 

== Etymology ==
 
There are confilicting explanations of the origin of the word "football".  It is widely assumed that the word "football" (or "foot ball") references the action of the foot kicking a ball.  There is an alternative explanation, which is that football originally referred to a variety of games in medieval Europe, which were played on foot.  There is no conclusive evidence for either explanation.

== Early history ==

=== Ancient games ===
  Lekythos.]]
 Ancient Greeks Romans are Greek team game known as "" (Episkyros)  ,
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library   or "" (phaininda),  , Antiphanes (388311&nbsp;BC) Christian theologian Clement of Alexandria (c.150-c.215&nbsp;AD). These games appear to have resembled rugby football.      The Roman politician Cicero (10643&nbsp;BC) describes the case of a man who was killed whilst having a shave when a ball was kicked into a barbers shop. Roman ball games already knew the air-filled ball, the Follis (ball game)|follis.  

  painting by Su Hanchen, depicting Chinese children playing cuju.]]

According to FIFA the competitive game cuju  is the earliest form of football for which there is scientific evidence    though this view is disputed by scholars.  It occurs namely as an exercise in a military manual from the third and second centuries BC.  Documented evidence of an activity resembling football can be found in the Chinese military manual Zhan Guo Ce compiled between the 3rd century and 1st century BC.  It describes a practice known as cuju (, literally "kick ball"), which originally involved kicking a leather ball through a small hole in a piece of silk cloth which was fixed on bamboo canes and hung about 9&nbsp;m above ground. During the Han Dynasty (206&nbsp;BC220&nbsp;AD), cuju games were standardized and rules were established.  Variations of this game later spread to Japan and Korea, known as kemari and chuk-guk respectively. Later, another type of goal posts emerged, consisting of just one goal post in the middle of the field. 

  player of the Tepantitla murals in Teotihuacan.]]
 , Japan.]]

The Japanese version of cuju is kemari (), and was developed during the Asuka period.  This is known to have been played within the Japanese imperial court in Kyoto from about 600&nbsp;AD. In kemari several people stand in a circle and kick a ball to each other, trying not to let the ball drop to the ground (much like keepie uppie). The game appears to have died out sometime before the mid-19th century. It was revived in 1903 and is now played at a number of festivals. 
 origins of Australian rules football.
  hunter gatherers. Children in the background are playing a football game, possibly Woggabaliri. ]]

The Mori people|Mori in New Zealand played a game called Ki-o-rahi consisting of teams of seven players play on a circular field divided into zones, and score points by touching the pou (boundary markers) and hitting a central tupu or target. 
 Games played indigenous peoples are also well-documented as existing since before this time, but these had more similarities to basketball or volleyball, and since their influence on modern football games is minimal, most do not class them as football.  Northeastern American Indians, especially the Iroquois Confederation, played a game which made use of net racquets to throw and catch a small ball; however, although a ball-goal foot game, lacrosse (as its modern descendant is called) is likewise not usually classed as a form of "football." 

These games and others may well go far back into antiquity. However, the main sources of modern football codes appear to lie in western Europe, especially England.

=== Medieval and early modern Europe ===
 
 The Middle Ages saw a huge rise in popularity of annual Shrovetide football matches throughout Europe, particularly in England. An early reference to a ball game played in Britain comes from the 9th century Historia Brittonum, which describes "a party of boys ... playing at ball".  References to a ball game played in northern France known as La Soule or Choule, in which the ball was propelled by hands, feet, and sticks,  date from the 12th century. 
 "]]

The early forms of football played in England, sometimes referred to as "mob football", would be played between neighbouring towns and villages, involving an unlimited number of players on opposing teams who would clash en masse,  struggling to move an item, such as inflated animals bladder    to particular geographical points, such as their opponents church, with play taking place in the open space between neighbouring parishes.  The game was played primarily during significant religious festivals, such as Shrovetide, Christmas, or Easter,  and Shrovetide games have survived into the modern era in a number of English towns (see below).

The first detailed description of what was almost certainly football in England was given by William FitzStephen in about 11741183. He described the activities of London youths during the annual festival of Shrove Tuesday:
:After lunch all the youth of the city go out into the fields to take part in a ball game. The students of each school have their own ball; the workers from each city craft are also carrying their balls. Older citizens, fathers, and wealthy citizens come on horseback to watch their juniors competing, and to relive their own youth vicariously: you can see their inner passions aroused as they watch the action and get caught up in the fun being had by the carefree adolescents. 

Most of the very early references to the game speak simply of "ball play" or "playing at ball". This reinforces the idea that the games played at the time did not necessarily involve a ball being kicked.

An early reference to a ball game that was probably football comes from 1280 at   being charged with accidentally stabbing a player named William Bernard.   Another reference to a football game comes in 1321 at Shouldham, Norfolk, England: " uring the game at ball as he kicked the ball, a lay friend of his... ran against him and wounded himself". 

In 1314, Nicholas de Farndone, Lord Mayor of the City of London issued a decree banning football in the French used by the English upper classes at the time. A translation reads: " orasmuch as there is great noise in the city caused by hustling over large foot balls    in the fields of the public from which many evils might arise which God forbid: we command and forbid on behalf of the king, on pain of imprisonment, such game to be used in the city in the future." This is the earliest reference to football.

In 1363, King Edward III of England issued a proclamation banning "...handball, football, or hockey; coursing and cock-fighting, or other such idle games",  showing that "football"  whatever its exact form in this case  was being differentiated from games involving other parts of the body, such as handball.

A game known as "football" was played in Scotland as early as the 15th century: it was prohibited by the Football Act 1424 and although the law fell into disuse it was not repealed until 1906. There is evidence for schoolboys playing a "football" ball game in Aberdeen in 1633 (some references cite 1636) which is notable as an early allusion to what some have considered to be passing the ball. The word "pass" in the most recent translation is derived from "huc percute" (strike it here) and later "repercute pilam" (strike the ball again) in the original Latin. It is not certain that the ball was being struck between members of the same team. The original word translated as "goal" is "metum", literally meaning the "pillar at each end of the circus course" in a Roman chariot race. There is a reference to "get hold of the ball before   does" (Praeripe illi pilam si possis agere) suggesting that handling of the ball was allowed. One sentence states in the original 1930 translation "Throw yourself against him" (Age, objice te illi).
 
King Henry IV of England also presented one of the earliest documented uses of the English word "football", in 1409, when he issued a proclamation forbidding the levying of money for "foteball".    

There is also an account in Latin from the end of the 15th century of football being played at Cawston, Nottinghamshire|Cawston, Nottinghamshire. This is the first description of a "kicking game" and the first description of dribbling: " he game at which they had met for common recreation is called by some the foot-ball game. It is one in which young men, in country sport, propel a huge ball not by throwing it into the air but by striking it and rolling it along the ground, and that not with their hands but with their feet... kicking in opposite directions" The chronicler gives the earliest reference to a football pitch, stating that: " he boundaries have been marked and the game had started. 
 early modern eras:

* "a football", in the sense of a ball rather than a game, was first mentioned in 1486.  This reference is in Dame Juliana Berners Book of St Albans. It states: "a certain rounde instrument to play with ...it is an instrument for the foote and then it is calde in Latyn pila pedalis, a fotebal." 
* a pair of football boots was ordered by King Henry VIII of England in 1526. 
* women playing a form of football was in 1580, when Sir Philip Sidney described it in one of his poems: "  tyme there is for all, my mother often sayes, When she, with skirts tuckt very hy, with girles at football playes."  Richard Carew referred to "goals" in Cornish hurling. Carew described how goals were made: "they pitch two bushes in the ground, some eight or ten foote asunder; and directly against them, ten or twelue   score off, other twayne in like distance, which they terme their Goales". {{cite web
|url=http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/etext06/srvcr10.txt
|title=EBook of The Survey of Cornwall
|author=Richard Carew
|publisher=Project Gutenberg
|accessdate=2007-10-03}}  He is also the first to describe goalkeepers and passing of the ball between players.
* the first direct reference to scoring a goal is in  " (an extremely violent variety of football, which was popular in East Anglia). Similarly in a poem in 1613, Michael Drayton refers to "when the Ball to throw, And drive it to the Gole, in squadrons forth they goe".

=== Calcio Fiorentino ===
 
  Epiphany and Lent by playing a game which today is known as "calcio storico" ("historic kickball") in the Piazza Santa Croce. The young aristocrats of the city would dress up in fine silk costumes and embroil themselves in a violent form of football. For example, calcio players could punch, shoulder charge, and kick opponents. Blows below the belt were allowed. The game is said to have originated as a military training exercise. In 1580, Count Giovanni de Bardi di Vernio wrote Discorso sopra l giuoco del Calcio Fiorentino. This is sometimes said to be the earliest code of rules for any football game. The game was not played after January 1739 (until it was revived in May 1930).

=== Official disapproval and attempts to ban football ===
  early modern period. Between 1324 and 1667, football was banned in England alone by more than 30 royal and local laws. The need to repeatedly proclaim such laws demonstrated the difficulty in enforcing bans on popular games. Edward II was so troubled by the unruliness of football in London that on April 13, 1314 he issued a proclamation banning it: "Forasmuch as there is great noise in the city caused by hustling over large balls from which many evils may arise which God forbid; we command and forbid, on behalf of the King, on pain of imprisonment, such game to be used in the city in the future."
 Football Act that stated it is statut and the king forbiddis that na man play at the fut ball under the payne of iiij d  in other words, playing football was made illegal, and punishable by a fine of four Penny Scots|pence.

By 1608, the local authorities in Manchester were complaining that: "With the ffotebale...  hath beene greate disorder in our towne of Manchester we are told, and glasse windowes broken yearlye and spoyled by a companie of lewd and disordered persons ..."  That same year, the word
"football" was used disapprovingly by William Shakespeare. Shakespeares play King Lear contains the line: "Nor tripped neither, you base football player" (Act I, Scene 4).
Shakespeare also mentions the game in A Comedy of Errors (Act II, Scene 1):

{{quote| Am I so round with you as you with me,
That like a football you do spurn me thus?
You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither:
If I last in this service, you must case me in leather. }}

"Spurn" literally means to kick away, thus implying that the game involved kicking a ball between players.

King James I of Englands Book of Sports (1618) however, instructs Christians to play at football every Sunday afternoon after worship.  The books aim appears to be an attempt to offset the strictness of the Puritans regarding the keeping of the Sabbath in Christianity|Sabbath. 

== Establishment of modern codes ==

=== English public schools ===
 
While football continued to be played in various forms throughout Britain, its public school (England)|"public" schools (known as private schools in other countries) are widely credited with four key achievements in the creation of modern football codes. First of all, the evidence suggests that they were important in taking football away from its "mob" form and turning it into an organised team sport. Second, many early descriptions of football and references to it were recorded by people who had studied at these schools. Third, it was teachers, students and former students from these schools who first codified football games, to enable matches to be played between schools. Finally, it was at English public schools that the division between "kicking" and "running" (or "carrying") games first became clear.
 Eton and Winchester colleges and his Latin textbook includes a translation exercise with the phrase "We wyll playe with a ball full of wynde". 

Richard Mulcaster, a student at Eton College in the early 16th century and later headmaster at other English schools, has been described as "the greatest sixteenth Century advocate of football".  Among his contributions are the earliest evidence of organised team football. Mulcasters writings refer to teams ("sides" and "parties"), positions ("standings"), a referee ("judge over the parties") and a coach "(trayning maister)". Mulcasters "footeball" had evolved from the disordered and violent forms of traditional football:

{{quote| ome smaller number with such overlooking, sorted into sides and standings, not meeting with their bodies so boisterously to trie their strength: nor shouldring or shuffing one an other so barbarously ... may use footeball for as much good to the body, by the chiefe use of the legges. 
Francis Peabody Magoun. (1938) History of football from the beginnings to 1871. p.27. Retrieved 2010-02-09. }}
 David Wedderburn, a teacher from Aberdeen, mentioned elements of modern football games in a short Latin textbook called Vocabula. Wedderburn refers to what has been translated into modern English as "keeping goal" and makes an allusion to passing the ball ("strike it here"). There is a reference to "get hold of the ball", suggesting that some handling was allowed. It is clear that the tackles allowed included the charging and holding of opposing players ("drive that man back"). 

A more detailed description of football is given in Francis Willughbys Book of Games, written in about 1660.  Willughby, who had studied at Bishop Veseys Grammar School, Sutton Coldfield, is the first to describe goals and a distinct playing field: "a close that has a gate at either end. The gates are called Goals." His book includes a diagram illustrating a football field. He also mentions tactics ("leaving some of their best players to guard the goal"); scoring ("they that can strike the ball through their opponents goal first win") and the way teams were selected ("the players being equally divided according to their strength and nimbleness"). He is the first to describe a "law" of football: "they must not strike   higher than the ball". 
 Harrow and Cheltenham School|Cheltenham, during between 1810 and 1850.  The first known codes  in the sense of a set of rules  were those of Eton in 1815  {{cite book
| title = Encyclopedia of British Football
| author = Richard William Cox | coauthors = Dave Russell and Wray Vamplew
| publisher = Routledge | year = 2002 | isbn = 978-0-7146-5249-8
| page = 243
}}  and Aldenham in 1825. )
 children were part of the labour force. Feast day football played on the streets was in decline. Public school boys, who enjoyed some freedom from work, became the inventors of organised football games with formal codes of rules.
 Marlborough and Westminster and Charterhouse School|Charterhouse). The division into these two camps was partly the result of circumstances in which the games were played. For example, Charterhouse and Westminster at the time had restricted playing areas; the boys were confined to playing their ball game within the school cloisters, making it difficult for them to adopt rough and tumble running games. 

  ]] William Webb Ellis, a pupil at Rugby School, is said to have "with a fine disregard for the rules of football, as played in his time  , first took the ball in his arms and ran with it, thus creating the distinctive feature of the rugby game." in 1823. This act is usually said to be the beginning of Rugby football, but there is little evidence that it occurred, and most sports historians believe the story to be apocryphal. The act of taking the ball in his arms is often misinterpreted as picking the ball up as it is widely believed that Webb Ellis crime was handling the ball, as in modern soccer, however handling the ball at the time was often permitted and in some cases compulsory, example of ball handling in early football from English writer William Hone, writing in 1825 or 1826, quotes the social commentator Sir Frederick Morton Eden, regarding "Foot-Ball", as played at Scone, Scotland:
:The game was this: he who at any time got the ball into his hands, run   with it till overtaken by one of the opposite part; and then, if he could shake himself loose from those on the opposite side who seized him, he run on; if not, he threw the ball from him, unless it was wrested from him by the other party, but no person was allowed to kick it. (  Access date: March 15, 2007.)  the rule for which Webb Ellis showed disregard was running forward with it as the rules of his time only allowed a player to retreat backwards or kick forwards.
 The boom in rail transport in Britain during the 1840s meant that people were able to travel further and with less inconvenience than they ever had before. Inter-school sporting competitions became possible. However, it was difficult for schools to play each other at football, as each school played by its own rules. The solution to this problem was usually that the match be divided into two halves, one half played by the rules of the host "home" school, and the other half by the visiting "away" school.

The modern rules of many football codes were formulated during the mid- or late- 19th century. This also applies to other sports such as lawn bowls, lawn tennis, etc. The major impetus for this was the patenting of the worlds first lawnmower in 1830. This allowed for the preparation of modern ovals, playing fields, pitches, grass courts, etc. 
 Surviving UK school games below).

Public schools dominance of sports in the UK began to wane after the Factory Act 1850|Factory Act of 1850, which significantly increased the recreation time available to working class children. Before 1850, many British children had to work six days a week, for more than twelve hours a day. From 1850, they could not work before 6&nbsp;a.m. (7&nbsp;a.m. in winter) or after 6&nbsp;p.m. on weekdays (7&nbsp;p.m. in winter); on Saturdays they had to cease work at 2&nbsp;p.m. These changes mean that working class children had more time for games, including various forms of football.

=== Firsts ===

==== Clubs ====
 

Sports clubs dedicated to playing football began in the 18th century, for example The Gymnastic Society|Londons Gymnastic Society which was founded in the mid-18th century and ceased playing matches in 1796.  

The first documented club to bear in the title a reference to being a football club were called "The Foot-Ball Club" who were located in Edinburgh, Scotland, during the period 182441.      The club forbade tripping but allowed pushing and holding and the picking up of the ball. 

Two clubs which claim to be the worlds  , said to have been founded in 1839, and Guys Hospital Football Club, in 1843. Neither date nor the variety of football played is well documented, but such claims nevertheless allude to the popularity of rugby before other modern codes emerged.

In 1845, three boys at Rugby school were tasked with codifying the rules then being used at the school. These were the first set of written rules (or code) for any form of football.  This further assisted the spread of the Rugby game. For instance, Dublin University Football Clubfounded at Trinity College, Dublin in 1854 and later famous as a bastion of the Rugby School gameis the worlds oldest documented football club in any code.

==== Competitions ====
 
 Caledonian Society Yorkshire Cup, first ever international football match took place between sides representing England and Scotland on March 5, 1870 at the Oval under the authority of the FA. The first Rugby international took place in 1871.

==== Modern balls ====
 
 William Gilbert, Rugby (near the school), exhibited both round and oval-shaped balls at the Great Exhibition in London. Richard Lindons wife is said to have died of lung disease caused by blowing up pigs bladders.  Lindon also won medals for the invention of the "Rubber inflatable Bladder" and the "Brass Hand Pump".
 Paris Exhibition Universelle. The ball was to prove popular in early forms of football in the U.S.A. 

==== Modern ball passing tactics ====
 

The earliest reference to a game of football involving players passing the ball and attempting to score past a goalkeeper was written in 1633 by David Wedderburn, a poet and teacher in Aberdeen, Scotland.   Nevertheless, the original text does not state whether the allusion to passing as kick the ball back (Repercute pilam) was in a forward or backward direction or between members of the same opposing teams (as was usual at this time) 

"Scientific" football is first recorded in 1839 from   in March 1872, the first of which is irrefutably a short pass: "Mr Absey dribbling the ball half the length of the field delivered it to Wallis, who kicking it cleverly in front of the goal, sent it to the captain who drove it at once between the Nottingham posts"  The first side to have perfected the modern formation was Cambridge University AFC    and introduced the 235 "pyramid" formation.  

=== Cambridge rules ===
  Cambridge University, Winchester and Shrewsbury. An eight-hour meeting produced what amounted to the first set of modern rules, known as the Cambridge rules. No copy of these rules now exists, but a revised version from circa 1856 is held in the library of Shrewsbury School. 
  
  The rules clearly favour the kicking game. Handling was only allowed when a player catches the ball directly from the foot entitling them to a free kick and there was a primitive offside rule, disallowing players from "loitering" around the opponents goal. The Cambridge rules were not widely adopted outside English public schools and universities (but it was arguably the most significant influence on the Football Association committee members responsible for formulating the rules of Association football).

=== Sheffield rules ===
  Sheffield Football Club, founded in 1857 in the English city of Sheffield by Nathaniel Creswick and William Prest, was later recognised as the worlds oldest club playing association football.   
However, the club initially played its own code of football: the Sheffield rules. The code was largely independent of the public school rules, the most significant difference being the lack of an offside rule.
 London and Sheffield FAs gradually eroded the differences between the two games until the adoption of a common code in 1877.

=== Australian rules ===
 
  Richmond Paddock, Melbourne, in 1866. A wood engraving by Robert Bruce.]]
Various forms of football were played in Australia during the Victorian gold rush, from which emerged a distinct and locally popular sport. While these origins are still the subject of much debate the popularisation of the code that is known today as Australian Rules Football is currently attributed to Tom Wills.
 Scotch College. Following these matches, organised football matches rapidly increased in popularity.

Wills and others involved in these early matches formed the Melbourne Football Club (the oldest surviving Australian football club) on May 14, 1859. The first members included Wills, William Hammersley, J.B. Thompson and Thomas H. Smith. They met with the intention of forming a set of rules that would be widely adopted by other clubs.
 free kick, throwing the ball.
 spectacular high other Australian other parts of the world at an amateur level and the Australian Football League emerged as the dominant professional competition.

=== Football Association === Scotland versus England national football team|England. Once kept by the Rugby Football Union as an early example of rugby football.]]
 
During the early 1860s, there were increasing attempts in England to unify and reconcile the various public school games. In 1862, J. C. Thring, who had been one of the driving forces behind the original Cambridge Rules, was a master at Uppingham School and he issued his own rules of what he called "The Simplest Game" (these are also known as the Uppingham Rules). In early October 1863 another new revised version of the Cambridge Rules was drawn up by a seven member committee representing former pupils from Harrow, Shrewsbury, Eton, Rugby, Marlborough and Westminster.
 London Metropolitan area met for the inaugural meeting of The Football Association (FA). The aim of the Association was to establish a single unifying code and regulate the playing of the game among its members. Following the first meeting, the public schools were invited to join the association. All of them declined, except Charterhouse and Uppingham. In total, six meetings of the FA were held between October and December 1863. After the third meeting, a draft set of rules were published. However, at the beginning of the fourth meeting, attention was drawn to the recently published Cambridge Rules of 1863. The Cambridge rules differed from the draft FA rules in two significant areas; namely running with (carrying) the ball and hacking (kicking opposing players in the shins). The two contentious FA rules were as follows:

{{quote|IX. A player shall be entitled to run with the ball towards his adversaries goal if he makes a fair catch, or catches the ball on the first bound; but in case of a fair catch, if he makes his mark he shall not run.
 
X. If any player shall run with the ball towards his adversaries goal, any player on the opposite side shall be at liberty to charge, hold, trip or hack him, or to wrest the ball from him, but no player shall be held and hacked at the same time.| }}
 Association Football. The term "soccer", in use since the late 19th century, derives from an abbreviation of "Association".   

The first FA rules still contained elements that are no longer part of association football, but which are still recognisable in other games (such as Australian football and rugby football): for instance, a player could make a fair catch and claim a Mark (Australian football)|mark, which entitled him to a free kick; and if a player touched the ball behind the opponents goal line, his side was entitled to a free kick at goal, from 15&nbsp;yards (13.5&nbsp;metres) in front of the goal line.

=== Rugby football ===
 
 
In United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland|Britain, by 1870, there were about 75 clubs playing variations of the Rugby school game. There were also "rugby" clubs in Ireland, Australia, Canada and New Zealand. However, there was no generally accepted set of rules for rugby until 1871, when 21 clubs from London came together to form the Rugby Football Union (RFU). The first official RFU rules were adopted in June 1871. These rules allowed passing the ball. They also included the try, where touching the ball over the line allowed an attempt at goal, though drop-goals from marks and general play, and penalty conversions were still the main form of contest.

=== North American football codes ===
 
 

As was the case in Britain, by the early 19th century, North American schools and universities played their own local games, between sides made up of students. Students at Dartmouth College in New Hampshire played a game called Old division football, a variant of the association football codes, as early as the 1820s.

 , circa 1906. Founded 1869 as the Hamilton Foot Ball Club, they eventually merged with the Hamilton Flying Wildcats to form the Hamilton Tiger-Cats, a team still active in the Canadian Football League.   ]]
The first game of rugby in Canada is generally said to have taken place in Montreal, in 1865, when British Army officers played local civilians. The game gradually gained a following, and the Montreal Football Club was formed in 1868, the first recorded football club in Canada.
 first game Princeton and Rutgers University|Rutgers. This is also often considered to be the first U.S. game of college football, in the sense of a game between colleges (although the eventual form of American football would come from rugby, not association football).

Modern American football grew out of a match between McGill University of Montreal, and Harvard University in 1874.  At the time, Harvard students are reported to have played the Boston Game  a running code  rather than the FA-based kicking games favoured by U.S. universities. This made it easy for Harvard to adapt to the rugby-based game played by McGill and the two teams alternated between their respective sets of rules. Within a few years, however, Harvard had both adopted McGills rugby rules and had persuaded other U.S. university teams to do the same. In 1876, at the Massasoit Convention, it was agreed by these universities to adopt most of the Rugby Football Union rules, with some variations. Princeton, Rutgers and others continued to compete using soccer-based rules for a few years before switching to the rugby-based rules of Harvard and its competitors. U.S. colleges did not generally return to soccer until the early 20th century.

  Yale coach Walter Camp, devised a number of major changes to the American game. Camps two most important rule innovations in establishing American football as distinct from the rugby football games on which it is based are scrimmage and down-and-distance rules.
 Scrimmage refers down and play stops, while the teams reset on either side of the line of scrimmage. Play then resumes with the delivery of the ball. Teams are given a limited number of downs to achieve a certain distance (always measured in yards). In American football, teams are given four downs to advance the ball ten yards, after which possession of the ball changes. In Canadian football, teams are allowed three downs to advance ten yards. These rules created a fundamental distinction between the North American codes and rugby codes. Rugby is still fundamentally a continuous-action game, while North American codes are organized around running discrete "Play from scrimmage|plays", as defined as starting with the delivery from "scrimmage" and ending with the "down".

====Criticisms and partial adjustments====
:"No sport is wholesome in which ungenerous or mean acts which easily escape detection contribute to victory." - Charles William Eliot, President of Harvard University (1869-1909) opposing football in 1905. 
 President Theodore Roosevelt threatened to shut down the game in 1905, should rules not be changed to minimize this violence.  Several rule changes were put into place that year, but the most enduring has been the introduction of the legal forward pass which opened up the play and, like Camps rule changes of the 1880s, fundamentally changed the nature of the sport. When it became legal to throw the ball forward, an entire new method of advancing the ball emerged. As a result, players became more specialized in their roles, as the different positions on the team required different skill sets. Thus, some players are primarily involved in running with the ball (the running back) while others specialize in throwing (the quarterback), catching (the wide receiver), or blocking (the offensive line). With the advent of free substitution rules in the 1940s and 1950s, teams could deploy separate offensive and defensive "platoons" which led to even greater specialization.

Over the years, Canadian football absorbed some developments in American football, but also retained many unique characteristics. One of these was that Canadian football, for many years, did not officially distinguish itself from rugby. For example, the Canadian Rugby Football Union, founded in 1884 was the forerunner of the Canadian Football League, rather than a rugby union body. (The Canadian Rugby Union, today known as Rugby Canada, was not formed until 1965.) American football was also frequently described as "rugby" in the 1880s.

=== Gaelic football ===
  in Croke Park, 2004.]]
 
In the mid-19th century, various traditional football games, referred to collectively as   boundary. "Wrestling", "holding" opposing players, and carrying the ball were all allowed.
 Developments in the 1850s section, above). The rules of the English FA were being distributed widely. Traditional forms of caid had begun to give way to a "rough-and-tumble game" which allowed tripping.

There was no serious attempt to unify and codify Irish varieties of football, until the establishment of the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) in 1884. The GAA sought to promote traditional Irish sports, such as hurling and to reject imported games like Rugby and Association football. The first Gaelic football rules were drawn up by Maurice Davin and published in the United Ireland magazine on February 7, 1887. Davins rules showed the influence of games such as hurling and a desire to formalise a distinctly Irish code of football. The prime example of this differentiation was the lack of an offside rule (an attribute which, for many years, was shared only by other Irish games like hurling, and by Australian rules football).

===  Schism in Rugby football ===
 . The caricatures are of Rev. Frank Marshall, an arch-opponent of player payments, and James Miller, a long-time opponent of Marshall. The caption reads:

Marshall: "Oh, fie, go away naughty boy, I dont play with boys who cant afford to take a holiday for football any day they like!"

Miller: "Yes, thats just you to a T; youd make it so that no lad whose father wasnt a millionaire could play at all in a really good team. For my part I see no reason why the men who make the money shouldnt have a share in the spending of it."]]
  International Rugby Professionalism was beginning to creep into the various codes of football.
 Northern Rugby Football Union (NRFU). The new body initially permitted only various types of player wage replacements. However, within two years, NRFU players could be paid, but they were required to have a job outside sport.

The demands of a professional league dictated that rugby had to become a better "spectator" sport. Within a few years the NRFU rules had started to diverge from the RFU, most notably with the abolition of the line-out (rugby union)|line-out. This was followed by the replacement of the Playing rugby union#Ruck|ruck with the "play-the-ball ruck", which allowed a two-player ruck contest between the tackler at marker and the player tackled. Rugby union gameplay#Maul|Mauls were stopped once the ball carrier was held, being replaced by a play-the ball-ruck. The separate Lancashire and Yorkshire competitions of the NRFU merged in 1901, forming the Northern Rugby League, the first time the name rugby league was used officially in England.

Over time, the RFU form of rugby, played by clubs which remained members of national federations affiliated to the IRFB, became known as rugby union.

=== Globalisation of association football ===
 
The need for a single body to oversee association football had become apparent by the beginning of the 20th century, with the increasing popularity of international fixtures. The English Football Association had chaired many discussions on setting up an international body, but was perceived as making no progress. It fell to associations from seven other European countries: France, Belgium, Denmark, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland, to form an international association. The Fdration Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) was founded in Paris on May 21, 1904. Its first president was Robert Gurin. The French name and acronym has remained, even outside French-speaking countries.

=== Further divergence of the two rugby codes === rugby leagues were launched in Australia the following year. However, the rules of professional games varied from one country to another, and negotiations between various national bodies were required to fix the exact rules for each international match. This situation endured until 1948, when at the instigation of the French league, the Rugby League International Federation (RLIF) was formed at a meeting in Bordeaux.

During the second half of 20th century, the rules changed further. In 1966, rugby league officials borrowed the American football concept of  .

With the advent of full-time professionals in the early 1990s, and the consequent speeding up of the game, the five metre off-side distance between the two teams became 10&nbsp;metres, and the replacement rule was superseded by various interchange rules, among other changes.
 into touch 22 metre line were penalised, new laws were put in place to determine who had possession following an inconclusive Ruck (Rugby union)|ruck or Rugby union gameplay#Maul|maul, and the lifting of players in line-out (rugby union)|line-outs was legalised.

In 1995, rugby union became an "open" game, that is one which allowed professional players. Although the original dispute between the two codes has now disappeared  and despite the fact that 