
 
  ""      ?
      2 .     .
[Hide]
Geography
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Geographical" redirects here. For the magazine of the Royal Geographical Society, see Geographical (magazine). For other uses, see Geography (disambiguation).



Map of the Earth
Geography (from Greek , geographia, lit. "earth description"[1]) is the science that studies the lands, the features, the inhabitants, and the phenomena of the Earth.[2] A literal translation would be "to describe or write about the Earth". The first person to use the word "geography" was Eratosthenes (276-194 BC).[3] Four historical traditions in geographical research are the spatial analysis of the natural and the human phenomena (geography as the study of distribution), the area studies (places and regions), the study of the man-land relationship, and the research in the earth sciences.[4] Nonetheless, the modern geography is an all-encompassing discipline that foremost seeks to understand the Earth and all of its human and natural complexitiesnot merely where objects are, but how they have changed and come to be. Geography has been called "the world discipline" and "the bridge between the human and the physical science". Geography is divided into two main branches: the human geography and the physical geography.[5][6][7]
Part of a series on
Science
Formal sciences[show]
Physical sciences[show]
Life sciences[show]
Social sciences[show]
Applied sciences[show]
Interdisciplinarity[show]
Philosophy and history of science[show]
Outline Portal Category
v t e
Contents  [hide] 
1 Introduction
2 Branches
2.1 Physical geography
2.2 Human geography
2.3 Integrated geography
2.4 Geomatics
2.5 Regional geography
2.6 Related fields
3 Techniques
3.1 Cartography
3.2 Geographic information systems
3.3 Remote sensing
3.4 Quantitative methods
3.5 Qualitative methods
4 History
5 Notable geographers
6 Institutions and societies
7 Publications
8 See also
9 Notes and references
10 External links
Introduction

Traditionally, geographers have been viewed the same way as cartographers and people who study place names and numbers. Although many geographers are trained in toponymy and cartology, this is not their main preoccupation. Geographers study the spatial and the temporal distribution of phenomena, processes, and features as well as the interaction of humans and their environment.[8] Because space and place affect a variety of topics, such as economics, health, climate, plants and animals; geography is highly interdisciplinary.
	...mere names of places...are not geography...know by heart a whole gazetteer full of them would not, in itself, constitute anyone a geographer. Geography has higher aims than this: it seeks to classify phenomena (alike of the natural and of the political world, in so far as it treats of the latter), to compare, to generalize, to ascend from effects to causes, and, in doing so, to trace out the laws of nature and to mark their influences upon man. This is 'a description of the world'that is Geography. In a word Geography is a Sciencea thing not of mere names but of argument and reason, of cause and effect.[9]	
 	
 William Hughes, 1863
Geography as a discipline can be split broadly into two main subsidiary fields: the human geography and the physical geography. The former largely focuses on the built environment and how humans create, view, manage, and influence space. The latter examines the natural environment, and how organisms, climate, soil, water, and landforms produce and interact.[10] The difference between these approaches led to a third field, the environmental geography, which combines the physical and the human geography, and looks at the interactions between the environment and humans.[8]
Branches

Physical geography
Main article: Physical geography
Physical geography (or physiography) focuses on geography as an Earth science. It aims to understand the physical problems and the issues of lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, pedosphere, and global flora and fauna patterns (biosphere).
Physical geography can be divided into many broad categories, including:
			
Biogeography	Climatology & Meteorology	Coastal geography	Environmental management
			
Geodesy	Geomorphology	Glaciology	Hydrology & Hydrography
			
Landscape ecology	Oceanography	Pedology	Palaeogeography

Quaternary science
Human geography
Main article: Human geography
Human geography is a branch of geography that focuses on the study of patterns and processes that shape the human society. It encompasses the human, political, cultural, social, and economic aspects.
Human geography can be divided into many broad categories, such as:
			
Cultural geography	Development geography	Economic geography	Health geography
			
Historical & Time geog.	Political geog. & Geopolitics	Pop. geog. or Demography	Religion geography
			
Social geography	Transportation geography	Tourism geography	Urban geography
Various approaches to the study of human geography have also arisen through time and include:
Behavioral geography
Feminist geography
Culture theory
Geosophy
Integrated geography
Main article: Integrated geography
Integrated geography is the branch of geography that describes the spatial aspects of interactions between humans and the natural world. It requires an understanding of the traditional aspects of the physical and the human geography, as well as the ways that human societies conceptualize the environment.
Integrated geography has emerged as a bridge between the human and the physical geography, as a result of the increasing specialisation of the two sub-fields. Furthermore, as human relationship with the environment has changed as a result of globalization and technological change, a new approach was needed to understand the changing and dynamic relationship. Examples of areas of research in the environmental geography include: emergency management, environmental management, sustainability, and political ecology.
Geomatics
Main article: Geomatics


Digital Elevation Model (DEM)
Geomatics is a branch of geography that has emerged since the quantitative revolution in geography in the mid-1950s. Geomatics involves the use of traditional spatial techniques used in cartography and topography and their application to computers. Geomatics has become a widespread field with many other disciplines, using techniques such as GIS and remote sensing. Geomatics has also led to a revitalization of some geography departments, especially in Northern America where the subject had a declining status during the 1950s.
Geomatics encompasses a large area of fields involved with spatial analysis, such as Cartography, Geographic information systems (GIS), Remote sensing, and Global positioning systems (GPS).
Regional geography
Main article: Regional geography
Regional geography is a branch of geography which studies the regions of all sizes across the Earth. It has a prevailing descriptive character. The main aim is to understand, or define the uniqueness, or character of a particular region that consists of natural as well as human elements. Attention is paid also to regionalization, which covers the proper techniques of space delimitation into regions.
Regional geography is also considered as a certain approach to study in geographical sciences (similar to quantitative or critical geographies, for more information see History of geography).
Related fields
Urban planning, regional planning, and spatial planning: Use the science of geography to assist in determining how to develop (or not develop) the land to meet particular criteria, such as safety, beauty, economic opportunities, the preservation of the built or natural heritage, and so on. The planning of towns, cities, and rural areas may be seen as applied geography.
Regional science: In the 1950s, the regional science movement led by Walter Isard arose to provide a more quantitative and analytical base to geographical questions, in contrast to the descriptive tendencies of traditional geography programs. Regional science comprises the body of knowledge in which the spatial dimension plays a fundamental role, such as regional economics, resource management, location theory, urban and regional planning, transport and communication, human geography, population distribution, landscape ecology, and environmental quality.
Interplanetary Sciences: While the discipline of geography is normally concerned with the Earth, the term can also be informally used to describe the study of other worlds, such as the planets of the Solar System and even beyond. The study of systems larger than the Earth itself usually forms part of Astronomy or Cosmology. The study of other planets is usually called planetary science. Alternative terms such as Areology (the study of Mars) have been proposed, but are not widely used.
Techniques

As spatial interrelationships are key to this synoptic science, maps are a key tool. Classical cartography has been joined by a more modern approach to geographical analysis, computer-based geographic information systems (GIS).
In their study, geographers use four interrelated approaches:
Systematic  Groups geographical knowledge into categories that can be explored globally.
Regional  Examines systematic relationships between categories for a specific region or location on the planet.
Descriptive  Simply specifies the locations of features and populations.
Analytical  Asks why we find features and populations in a specific geographic area.
Cartography


James Cook's 1770 chart of New Zealand.
Main article: Cartography
Cartography studies the representation of the Earth's surface with abstract symbols (map making). Although other subdisciplines of geography rely on maps for presenting their analyses, the actual making of maps is abstract enough to be regarded separately. Cartography has grown from a collection of drafting techniques into an actual science.
Cartographers must learn cognitive psychology and ergonomics to understand which symbols convey information about the Earth most effectively, and behavioral psychology to induce the readers of their maps to act on the information. They must learn geodesy and fairly advanced mathematics to understand how the shape of the Earth affects the distortion of map symbols projected onto a flat surface for viewing. It can be said, without much controversy, that cartography is the seed from which the larger field of geography grew. Most geographers will cite a childhood fascination with maps as an early sign they would end up in the field.
Geographic information systems
Main article: Geographic information system
Geographic information systems (GIS) deal with the storage of information about the Earth for automatic retrieval by a computer, in an accurate manner appropriate to the information's purpose. In addition to all of the other subdisciplines of geography, GIS specialists must understand computer science and database systems. GIS has revolutionized the field of cartography: nearly all mapmaking is now done with the assistance of some form of GIS software. GIS also refers to the science of using GIS software and GIS techniques to represent, analyze, and predict the spatial relationships. In this context, GIS stands for Geographic Information Science.
Remote sensing
Main article: Remote sensing
Remote sensing is the science of obtaining information about Earth features from measurements made at a distance. Remotely sensed data comes in many forms, such as satellite imagery, aerial photography, and data obtained from hand-held sensors. Geographers increasingly use remotely sensed data to obtain information about the Earth's land surface, ocean, and atmosphere, because it: a) supplies objective information at a variety of spatial scales (local to global), b) provides a synoptic view of the area of interest, c) allows access to distant and inaccessible sites, d) provides spectral information outside the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, and e) facilitates studies of how features/areas change over time. Remotely sensed data may be analyzed either independently of, or in conjunction with other digital data layers (e.g., in a Geographic Information System).
Quantitative methods
Main article: Geostatistics
Geostatistics deal with quantitative data analysis, specifically the application of statistical methodology to the exploration of geographic phenomena. Geostatistics is used extensively in a variety of fields, including hydrology, geology, petroleum exploration, weather analysis, urban planning, logistics, and epidemiology. The mathematical basis for geostatistics derives from cluster analysis, linear discriminant analysis and non-parametric statistical tests, and a variety of other subjects. Applications of geostatistics rely heavily on geographic information systems, particularly for the interpolation (estimate) of unmeasured points. Geographers are making notable contributions to the method of quantitative techniques.
Qualitative methods
Main article: Ethnography
Geographic qualitative methods, or ethnographical research techniques, are used by human geographers. In cultural geography there is a tradition of employing qualitative research techniques, also used in anthropology and sociology. Participant observation and in-depth interviews provide human geographers with qualitative data.
History

Main article: History of geography
History of geography

Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography
v t e
The oldest known world maps date back to ancient Babylon from the 9th century BC.[11] The best known Babylonian world map, however, is the Imago Mundi of 600 BC.[12] The map as reconstructed by Eckhard Unger shows Babylon on the Euphrates, surrounded by a circular landmass showing Assyria, Urartu[13] and several cities, in turn surrounded by a "bitter river" (Oceanus), with seven islands arranged around it so as to form a seven-pointed star. The accompanying text mentions seven outer regions beyond the encircling ocean. The descriptions of five of them have survived.[14] In contrast to the Imago Mundi, an earlier Babylonian world map dating back to the 9th century BC depicted Babylon as being further north from the center of the world, though it is not certain what that center was supposed to represent.[11]
The ideas of Anaximander (c. 610 BC-c. 545 BC): considered by later Greek writers to be the true founder of geography, come to us through fragments quoted by his successors. Anaximander is credited with the invention of the gnomon, the simple, yet efficient Greek instrument that allowed the early measurement of latitude. Thales is also credited with the prediction of eclipses. The foundations of geography can be traced to the ancient cultures, such as the ancient, medieval, and early modern Chinese. The Greeks, who were the first to explore geography as both art and science, achieved this through Cartography, Philosophy, and Literature, or through Mathematics. There is some debate about who was the first person to assert that the Earth is spherical in shape, with the credit going either to Parmenides or Pythagoras. Anaxagoras was able to demonstrate that the profile of the Earth was circular by explaining eclipses. However, he still believed that the Earth was a flat disk, as did many of his contemporaries. One of the first estimates of the radius of the Earth was made by Eratosthenes.[15]
The first rigorous system of latitude and longitude lines is credited to Hipparchus. He employed a sexagesimal system that was derived from Babylonian mathematics. The parallels and meridians were sub-divided into 360, with each degree further subdivided 60 (minutes). To measure the longitude at different location on Earth, he suggested using eclipses to determine the relative difference in time.[16] The extensive mapping by the Romans as they explored new lands would later provide a high level of information for Ptolemy to construct detailed atlases. He extended the work of Hipparchus, using a grid system on his maps and adopting a length of 56.5 miles for a degree.[17]
From the 3rd century onwards, Chinese methods of geographical study and writing of geographical literature became much more complex than what was found in Europe at the time (until the 13th century).[18] Chinese geographers such as Liu An, Pei Xiu, Jia Dan, Shen Kuo, Fan Chengda, Zhou Daguan, and Xu Xiake wrote important treatises, yet by the 17th century advanced ideas and methods of Western-style geography were adopted in China.


The Ptolemy world map, reconstituted from Ptolemy's Geographia, written c. 150.
During the Middle Ages, the fall of the Roman empire led to a shift in the evolution of geography from Europe to the Islamic world.[18] Muslim geographers such as Muhammad al-Idrisi produced detailed world maps (such as Tabula Rogeriana), while other geographers such as Yaqut al-Hamawi, Abu Rayhan Biruni, Ibn Battuta, and Ibn Khaldun provided detailed accounts of their journeys and the geography of the regions they visited. Turkish geographer, Mahmud al-Kashgari drew a world map on a linguistic basis, and later so did Piri Reis (Piri Reis map). Further, Islamic scholars translated and interpreted the earlier works of the Romans and the Greeks and established the House of Wisdom in Baghdad for this purpose.[19] Ab Zayd al-Balkh, originally from Balkh, founded the "Balkh school" of terrestrial mapping in Baghdad.[20] Suhrb, a late tenth century Muslim geographer accompanied a book of geographical coordinates, with instructions for making a rectangular world map with equirectangular projection or cylindrical equidistant projection.[20][verification needed]
Abu Rayhan Biruni (976-1048) first described a polar equi-azimuthal equidistant projection of the celestial sphere.[21][verification needed] He was regarded as the most skilled when it came to mapping cities and measuring the distances between them, which he did for many cities in the Middle East and the Indian subcontinent. He often combined astronomical readings and mathematical equations, in order to develop methods of pin-pointing locations by recording degrees of latitude and longitude. He also developed similar techniques when it came to measuring the heights of mountains, depths of the valleys, and expanse of the horizon. He also discussed human geography and the planetary habitability of the Earth. He also calculated the latitude of Kath, Khwarezm, using the maximum altitude of the Sun, and solved a complex geodesic equation in order to accurately compute the Earth's circumference, which were close to modern values of the Earth's circumference.[22] His estimate of 6,339.9 km for the Earth radius was only 16.8 km less than the modern value of 6,356.7 km. In contrast to his predecessors, who measured the Earth's circumference by sighting the Sun simultaneously from two different locations, al-Biruni developed a new method of using trigonometric calculations, based on the angle between a plain and mountain top, which yielded more accurate measurements of the Earth's circumference, and made it possible for it to be measured by a single person from a single location.[23][verification needed]


Self portrait of Alexander von Humboldt, one of the early pioneers of geography
The European Age of Discovery during the 16th and the 17th centuries, where many new lands were discovered and accounts by European explorers such as Christopher Columbus, Marco Polo, and James Cook revived a desire for both accurate geographic detail, and more solid theoretical foundations in Europe. The problem facing both explorers and geographers was finding the latitude and longitude of a geographic location. The problem of latitude was solved long ago but that of longitude remained; agreeing on what zero meridian should be was only part of the problem. It was left to John Harrison to solve it by inventing the chronometer H-4 in 1760, and later in 1884 for the International Meridian Conference to adopt by convention the Greenwich meridian as zero meridian.[24]
The 18th and the 19th centuries were the times when geography became recognized as a discrete academic discipline, and became part of a typical university curriculum in Europe (especially Paris and Berlin). The development of many geographic societies also occurred during the 19th century, with the foundations of the Socit de Gographie in 1821,[25] the Royal Geographical Society in 1830,[26] Russian Geographical Society in 1845,[27] American Geographical Society in 1851,[28] and the National Geographic Society in 1888.[29] The influence of Immanuel Kant, Alexander von Humboldt, Carl Ritter, and Paul Vidal de la Blache can be seen as a major turning point in geography from a philosophy to an academic subject.
Over the past two centuries, the advancements in technology with computers have led to the development of geomatics. and new practices such as participant observation and geostatistics being incorporated into geography's portfolio of tools. In the West during the 20th century, the discipline of geography went through four major phases: environmental determinism, regional geography, the quantitative revolution, and critical geography. The strong interdisciplinary links between geography and the sciences of geology and botany, as well as economics, sociology and demographics have also grown greatly, especially as a result of Earth System Science that seeks to understand the world in a holistic view.
Notable geographers

Main articles: List of geographers and List of Graeco-Roman geographers


Gerardus Mercator
Eratosthenes (276BC - 194BC) - calculated the size of the Earth.
Strabo (64/63 BC  ca. AD 24) - wrote Geographica, one of the first books outlining the study of geography.
Ptolemy (c.90c.168) - compiled Greek and Roman knowledge into the book Geographia.
Al Idrisi (Arabic:     ; Latin: Dreses) (11001165/66) - author of Nuzhatul Mushtaq.
Gerardus Mercator (15121594) - innovative cartographer produced the mercator projection
Alexander von Humboldt (17691859) - Considered Father of modern geography, published the Kosmos and founder of the sub-field biogeography.
Carl Ritter (17791859) - Considered Father of modern geography. Occupied the first chair of geography at Berlin University.
Arnold Henry Guyot (18071884) - noted the structure of glaciers and advanced understanding in glacier motion, especially in fast ice flow.
William Morris Davis (18501934) - father of American geography and developer of the cycle of erosion.
Paul Vidal de la Blache (18451918) - founder of the French school of geopolitics and wrote the principles of human geography.
Sir Halford John Mackinder (18611947) - Co-founder of the LSE, Geographical Association
Carl O. Sauer (18891975) - Prominent cultural geographer
Walter Christaller (18931969) - human geographer and inventor of Central place theory.
Yi-Fu Tuan (1930-) - Chinese-American scholar credited with starting Humanistic Geography as a discipline.
David Harvey (1935-) - Marxist geographer and author of theories on spatial and urban geography, winner of the Vautrin Lud Prize.
Edward Soja (born 1941) - Noted for his work on regional development, planning and governance along with coining the terms Synekism and Postmetropolis.
Michael Frank Goodchild (1944-) - prominent GIS scholar and winner of the RGS founder's medal in 2003.
Doreen Massey (1944-) - Key scholar in the space and places of globalization and its pluralities, winner of the Vautrin Lud Prize.
Nigel Thrift (1949-) - originator of non-representational theory.
Ellen Churchill Semple (18631932) - She was America's first influential female geographer.
Institutions and societies

Anton Melik Geographical Institute (Slovenia)
National Geographic Society (U.S.)
American Geographical Society (U.S.)
National Geographic Bee (U.S.)
Royal Canadian Geographical Society (Canada)
Royal Geographical Society (UK)
Publications

African Geographical Review
Geographical Review
See also

	Geography portal
	Atlas portal
	
Book: Geography
Outline of geography
Index of geography articles
Notes and references

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Retrieved 2009-04-17.
^ "Geography". The American Heritage Dictionary/ of the English Language, Fourth Edition. Houghton Mifflin Company. Retrieved October 9, 2006.
^ Eratosthenes' Geography. Princeton University Press. 2010.
^ Pattison, W.D. (1990). "The Four Traditions of Geography". Journal of Geography 89 (5): 2026. doi:10.1080/00221349008979196. ISSN 0022-1341. Reprint of a 1964 article.
^ http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/morgans/lecture_2.prn.pdf
^ "1(b). Elements of Geography". Physicalgeography.net. Retrieved 2009-04-17.
^ Bonnett, Alastair What is Geography? London, Sage, 2008
^ a b Hayes-Bohanan, James. "What is Environmental Geography, Anyway?". Retrieved October 9, 2006.
^ Hughes, William. (1863). The Study of Geography. Lecture delivered at King's College, London by Sir Marc Alexander. Quoted in Baker, J.N.L (1963). The History of Geography. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. p. 66. ISBN 0-85328-022-3.
^ "What is geography?". AAG Career Guide: Jobs in Geography and related Geographical Sciences. Association of American Geographers. Archived from the original on October 6, 2006. Retrieved October 9, 2006.
^ a b Kurt A. Raaflaub & Richard J. A. Talbert (2009). Geography and Ethnography: Perceptions of the World in Pre-Modern Societies. John Wiley & Sons. p. 147. ISBN 1-4051-9146-5
^ Siebold, Jim Slide 103 via henry-davis.com - accessed 2008-02-04
^ http://www.jstor.org/pss/1151277 IMAGO MVNDI, Vol.48 pp.209
^ Finel, Irving (1995). A join to the map of the world: A notable discover. pp. 2627.
^ Jean-Louis and Monique Tassoul (1920). A Concise History of Solar and Stellar Physics. London: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-11711-X.
^ "Hipparcos of Rhodes". Technology Museum of Thessaloniki. 2001. Retrieved 2006-10-16.
^ Sullivan, Dan (2000). "Mapmaking and its History". Rutgers University. Retrieved 2006-10-16.
^ a b Needham, Joseph (1986). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 3. Taipei: Caves Books, Ltd. Page 512.
^ "Education". IslamiCity.com. Retrieved 2009-04-17.
^ a b E. Edson and Emilie Savage-Smith, Medieval Views of the Cosmos, pp. 61-3, Bodleian Library, University of Oxford
^ David A. King (1996), "Astronomy and Islamic society: Qibla, gnomics and timekeeping", in Roshdi Rashed, ed., Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, Vol. 1, p. 128-184 [153]. Routledge, London and New York.
^ James S. Aber (2003). Alberuni calculated the Earth's circumference at a small town of Pind Dadan Khan, District Jhelum, Punjab, Pakistan.Abu Rayhan al-Biruni, Emporia State University.
^ Lenn Evan Goodman (1992), Avicenna, p. 31, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-01929-X.
^ Aughton, Peter (2007). Voyages that changed the world. Quercus. p. 164. ISBN 978-1-84724-004-0.
^ "Socit de Gographie, Paris, France" (in French). Retrieved 2007-01-15.
^ "About Us". Royal Geographical Society. Retrieved 2007-01-15.
^ "   (  1845 .)". Rgo.org.ru. Retrieved 2009-04-17.
^ "The American Geographical Society". Amergeog.org. 2009-04-02. Retrieved 2009-04-17.
^ "Inspiring People to Care About the Planet". National Geographic. 2002-10-17. Retrieved 2009-04-17.
External links

Find more about Geography at Wikipedia's sister projects
	Definitions and translations from Wiktionary
	Media from Commons
	Learning resources from Wikiversity
	News stories from Wikinews
	Quotations from Wikiquote
	Source texts from Wikisource
	Textbooks from Wikibooks
	Travel information from Wikivoyage

[show] v t e
Geography
[show] v t e
Social sciences
Categories: GeographyEarth sciencesSocial sciencesAcademic disciplines
Navigation menu
Create accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView history

Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Toolbox
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Print/export
Languages

Afrikaans
Akan
Alemannisch



Aragons

Arpetan

Asturianu
Avae'

Aymar aru
Azrbaycanca
Bamanankan

Bn-lm-g
Basa Banyumasan


 ()

Bikol Central
Bislama

Boarisch

Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Catal

Cebuano
esky
Chavacano de Zamboanga
ChiShona
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch

Eesti

Espaol
Esperanto
Estremeu
Euskara

Fiji Hindi
Froyskt
Franais
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gidhlig
Galego





Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Igbo
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
/inuktitut

slenska
Italiano

Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut

Kapampangan
-

Kaszbsczi

Kernowek
Kiswahili

Kreyl ayisyen
Kurd

Ladino


Latina
Latvieu
Ltzebuergesch
Lietuvi
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingla
Lojban
Lumbaart
Magyar

Malagasy

Malti



Bahasa Melayu
Mirands



Nhuatl
Nederlands
Nedersaksies

 

Nordfriisk
Norsk bokml
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
 
Ozbekcha




Picard
Tok Pisin
Plattdtsch
Polski

Portugus
Romn
Romani
Rumantsch
Runa Simi


 
Gagana Samoa

Sardu
Scots
Sesotho sa Leboa
Shqip
Sicilianu

Simple English
SiSwati
Slovenina
Slovenina
Soomaaliga

 / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / 
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog

Taqbaylit
Tarandne
/tatara



Trke
Trkmene


Vneto
Vepsn kel
Ting Vit
Volapk
Vro
Walon

Winaray
Wolof
Xitsonga

Yorb

Zeuws
emaitka

Edit links
This page was last modified on 30 April 2013 at 18:02.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. 
Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaMobile view 