 
 
  
  nuggets or veins and in alluvial deposits. Less commonly, it occurs in minerals as gold compounds, usually with tellurium. 
 amalgam alloys; acid test.
 monetary policies, but were widely supplanted by fiat currency starting in the 1930s. The last gold certificate and gold coin currencies were issued in the U.S. in 1932. In Europe, most countries left the gold standard with the start of World War I in 1914 and, with huge war debts, did not return to gold as a medium of exchange.

A total of 171,300  s or, in terms of volume, about 8876 m 3 , or a cube 20.7 m on a side. The world consumption of new gold produced is about 50% in jewelry, 40% in investments, and 10% in industry.   

Besides its widespread monetary and symbolic functions, gold has many practical uses in dentistry, electronics, and other fields. Its high malleability, ductility, resistance to corrosion and most other chemical reactions, and conductivity of electricity has led to many uses, including electric wiring, colored-glass production, and gold leafing.

Most of the Earths gold lies at its core, the metals high density having made it sink there in the planets youth.  Virtually all discovered gold is considered to have been deposited later by meteorites that contained the element,      with the asteroid that formed Vredefort crater having been implicated in the formation of the largest gold mining region on earth, Witwatersrand basin.    

==Etymology==
"Gold" is cognate with similar words in many Germanic languages, deriving via Proto-Germanic *gulþą from Proto-Indo-European *gʰel- ("yellow/green").  

The symbol Au is from the  , according to some sources meaning "shining dawn",  from Sabine ausum "glowing dawn" Christie, A and Brathwaite, R.  , Institute of geological and Nuclear sciences Ltd&nbsp;– Retrieved 2012-06-07  although according to definitions within Latin dictionaries the meaning of the word aurum extends only to the same as todays reference to the metal.  The disagreement between definitions is possibly due to the accumulation of evidence from archaeology of the original anciency of the metal in civilization; in reference to "the dawn of civilization",  and in this respect has become the adopted modern meaning, disassociated from the original etymological Latin. 

==Characteristics==
Gold is the most malleable of all metals; a single gram can be beaten into a sheet of 1 square meter, or an ounce into 300 square feet. Gold leaf can be beaten thin enough to become transparent. The transmitted light appears greenish blue, because gold strongly reflects yellow and red.  Such semi-transparent sheets also strongly reflect infrared light, making them useful as infrared (radiant heat) shields in visors of heat-resistant suits, and in sun-visors for spacesuits. 
 conductor of electricity and corrosive reagents, and is therefore well suited for use in coins and jewelry and as a protective coating on other, more reactive metals. However, it is not chemically inert. Gold is almost insoluble, but can be dissolved in aqua regia.
 reduced and precipitated as oxidized and dissolves, allowing the gold to be displaced from solution and be recovered as a solid precipitate.

In addition, gold is very dense, a cubic meter weighing 19,300 kilograms|kg. By comparison, the density of lead is 11,340&nbsp;kg/m 3 , and that of the densest element, osmium, is 22,610&nbsp;kg/m 3 .

===Color===
  relativistic effects orbitals around gold atoms.   Similar effects impart a golden hue to metallic caesium.

Common colored gold alloys such as rose gold can be created by the addition of various amounts of copper and silver, as indicated in the triangular diagram to the left. Alloys containing palladium or nickel are also important in commercial jewelry as these produce white gold alloys. Less commonly, addition of manganese, aluminium, iron, indium and other elements can produce more unusual colors of gold for various applications.   

===Isotopes===
 
Gold has only one stable isotope,  197 Au, which is also its only naturally occurring isotope. Thirty-six radioisotopes have been synthesized ranging in atomic mass from 169 to 205. The most stable of these is  195 Au with a half-life of 186.1 days. The least stable is  171 Au, which decays by proton emission with a half-life of 30 µs. Most of golds radioisotopes with atomic masses below 197 decay by some combination of proton emission, alpha decay|α decay, and Beta decay#β+ decay|β+ decay. The exceptions are  195 Au, which decays by electron capture, and  196 Au, which decays most often by electron capture (93%) with a minor Beta decay#β− decay|β- decay path (7%).  All of golds radioisotopes with atomic masses above 197 decay by β- decay.   

At least 32  , and alpha decay. No other isomer or isotope of gold has three decay paths. 

==Applications==

===Monetary exchange===
  monetary exchange, either by issuance and recognition of gold coins or other bare metal quantities, or through gold-convertible paper instruments by establishing gold standards in which the total value of issued money is represented in a store of gold reserves.

The first gold coins of the Grecian age were struck in Lydia around 700 BC.  The talent (measurement)|talent coin of gold in use during the periods of Grecian history both before and during the time of the life of Homer weighed between 8.42 and 8.75&nbsp;grams.  From an earlier preference in using silver, European economies re-established the minting of gold as coinage during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.   

However, production has not grown in relation to the worlds economies. Today, gold mining output is declining.  With the sharp growth of economies in the 20th century, and increasing foreign exchange, the worlds gold reserves and their trading market have become a small fraction of all markets and fixed exchange rates of currencies to gold were no longer sustained.

At the beginning of World War I the warring nations moved to a fractional gold standard, inflating their currencies to finance the war effort. After World War II gold was replaced by a system of convertible currency following the Bretton Woods system. Gold standards and the direct convertibility of currencies to gold have been abandoned by world governments, being replaced by fiat currency in their stead. Switzerland was the last country to tie its currency to gold; it backed 40% of its value until the Swiss joined the International Monetary Fund in 1999. 
 carats (k). Pure gold is designated as 24k. English gold coins intended for circulation from 1526 into the 1930s were typically a standard 22k alloy called crown gold,  for hardness (American gold coins for circulation after 1837 contained the slightly lower amount of 0.900 fine gold, or 21.6 kt). 

Although the prices of some platinum group metals can be much higher, gold has long been considered the most desirable of precious metals, and its value has been used as the standard for many currency|currencies. Gold has been used as a symbol for purity, value, royalty, and particularly roles that combine these properties. Gold as a sign of wealth and prestige was ridiculed by Thomas More in his treatise Utopia (book)|Utopia. On that imaginary island, gold is so abundant that it is used to make chains for slaves, tableware, and lavatory seats. When ambassadors from other countries arrive, dressed in ostentatious gold jewels and badges, the Utopians mistake them for menial servants, paying homage instead to the most modestly dressed of their party.

===Investment===
 
 
 bars as a hedge against inflation or other economic disruptions. However, economist Martin Feldstein does not believe gold serves as a hedge against inflation or currency depreciation. 

The ISO 4217 currency code of gold is XAU.
 gold sovereign continue to be minted in 22k metal in historical tradition, and the South African Krugerand, first released in 1967, is also 22k.  The special issue Canadian Gold Maple Leaf coin contains the highest purity gold of any bullion coin, at 99.999% or 0.99999, while the popular issue Canadian Gold Maple Leaf coin has a purity of 99.99%.
 American Buffalo Vienna Philharmonic bullion coin and the Chinese Gold Panda.

===Jewelry===
 
  gold necklace depicting feline heads. Larco Museum Collection. Lima-Peru]]
Because of the softness of pure (24k) gold, it is usually alloyed with base metals for use in jewelry, altering its hardness and ductility, melting point, color and other properties. Alloys with lower caratage, typically 22k, 18k, 14k or 10k, contain higher percentages of copper or other base metals or silver or palladium in the alloy. Copper is the most commonly used base metal, yielding a redder color. World Gold Council, Jewellery Technology,    

Eighteen-carat gold containing 25% copper is found in antique and Russian jewelry and has a distinct, though not dominant, copper cast, creating rose gold. Fourteen-carat gold-copper alloy is nearly identical in color to certain bronze alloys, and both may be used to produce police and other badges. Blue gold can be made by alloying with iron and purple gold can be made by alloying with aluminium, although rarely done except in specialized jewelry. Blue gold is more brittle and therefore more difficult to work with when making jewelry. 

Fourteen- and eighteen-carat gold alloys with silver alone appear greenish-yellow and are referred to as green gold. White gold alloys can be made with palladium or nickel. White 18-carat gold containing 17.3% nickel, 5.5% zinc and 2.2% copper is silvery in appearance. Nickel is toxic, however, and its release from nickel white gold is controlled by legislation in Europe. 

Alternative white gold alloys are available based on palladium, silver and other white metals,  but the palladium alloys are more expensive than those using nickel. High-carat white gold alloys are far more resistant to corrosion than are either pure silver or sterling silver. The Japanese craft of Mokume-gane exploits the color contrasts between laminated colored gold alloys to produce decorative wood-grain effects.

===Medicine===
Conceived of as perhaps the most anciently administered medicine (apparently according to one source by shamanic practitioners)  and known of by Dioscorides,   apparent paradoxes of the actual toxicology of the substance nevertheless suggests the possibility still of serious gaps in understanding of action on physiology. 
 esotericists and forms of alternative medicine assign metallic gold a healing power.  Some gold salts do have anti-inflammatory properties and are used as pharmaceuticals in the treatment of arthritis and other similar conditions. Gold based injections have been explored as a means to help to reduce the pain and swelling of rheumatoid arthritis and tuberculosis.    However, only salts and radioisotopes of gold are of pharmacological value, as elemental (metallic) gold is inert to all chemicals it encounters inside the body.
 crowns and permanent bridge (dentistry)|bridges. The gold alloys slight malleability facilitates the creation of a superior molar mating surface with other teeth and produces results that are generally more satisfactory than those produced by the creation of porcelain crowns. The use of gold crowns in more prominent teeth such as incisors is favored in some cultures and discouraged in others.
 electron microscopy, the immunogold labels appear as extremely dense round spots at the position of the antigen. 
 electrical charge spatial resolution secondary electrons when irradiated by an electron beam, and these low-energy electrons are the most commonly used signal source used in the scanning electron microscope. 

The isotope gold-198 (half-life 2.7 days) is used, in nuclear medicine, in some cancer treatments and for treating other diseases.  

===Food and drink===
* Gold can be used in food and has the E number 175.   
* Gold leaf, flake or dust is used on and in some gourmet foods, notably sweets and drinks as decorative ingredient.  Gold flake was used by the nobility in medieval Europe as a decoration in food and drinks, in the form of leaf, flakes or dust, either to demonstrate the hosts wealth or in the belief that something that valuable and rare must be beneficial for ones health.
* Danziger Goldwasser (German: Gold water of Danzig) or Goldwasser ( ) is a traditional German herbal liqueur  produced in what is today Gdańsk, Poland, and Schwabach, Germany, and contains flakes of gold leaf. There are also some expensive (~$1000) cocktails which contain flakes of gold leaf.  However, since metallic gold is inert to all body chemistry, it has no taste, it provides no nutrition, and it leaves the body unaltered. 

===Industry===
  Gold Museum, Taiwan Province|Taiwan, Republic of China.]] Toi museum, Japan.]] Toi museum, Japan.]]
* Gold solder is used for joining the components of gold jewelry by high-temperature hard soldering or brazing. If the work is to be of hallmarking quality, gold solder must match the carat weight of the work, and alloy formulas are manufactured in most industry-standard carat weights to color match yellow and white gold. Gold solder is usually made in at least three melting-point ranges referred to as Easy, Medium and Hard. By using the hard, high-melting point solder first, followed by solders with progressively lower melting points, goldsmiths can assemble complex items with several separate soldered joints. thread and used in embroidery.
* Gold produces a deep, intense red color when used as a coloring agent in cranberry glass.
* In photography, gold toners are used to shift the color of silver bromide black-and-white prints towards brown or blue tones, or to increase their stability. Used on sepia tone|sepia-toned prints, gold toners produce red tones. Kodak published formulas for several types of gold toners, which use gold as the chloride.  visible light radio waves. It is used for the protective coatings on many artificial satellites, in infrared protective faceplates in thermal protection suits and astronauts helmets and in electronic warfare planes like the EA-6B Prowler.
* Gold is used as the reflective layer on some Gold CD|high-end CDs. F1 model. 
* Gold can be manufactured so thin that it appears transparent. It is used in some aircraft cockpit windows for Deicing|de-icing or anti-icing by passing electricity through it. The heat produced by the resistance of the gold is enough to deter ice from forming.   

===Electronics=== conductive to electricity, and has been used for electrical wiring in some high-energy applications (only silver and copper are more conductive per volume, but gold has the advantage of corrosion resistance). For example, gold electrical wires were used during some of the Manhattan Projects atomic experiments, but large high current silver wires were used in the calutron isotope separator magnets in the project.

Though gold is attacked by free chlorine, its good conductivity and general resistance to oxidation and corrosion in other environments (including resistance to non-chlorinated acids) has led to its widespread industrial use in the electronic era as a thin layer coating electrical connectors, thereby ensuring good connection. For example, gold is used in the connectors of the more expensive electronics cables, such as audio, video and USB cables. The benefit of using gold over other connector metals such as tin in these applications has been debated; gold connectors are often criticized by audio-visual experts as unnecessary for most consumers and seen as simply a marketing ploy. However, the use of gold in other applications in electronic sliding contacts in highly humid or corrosive atmospheres, and in use for contacts with a very high failure cost (certain computers, communications equipment, spacecraft, jet aircraft engines) remains very common. 
 electrical contacts ductility and lack of toxicity.  Switch contacts are generally subjected to more intense corrosion stress than are sliding contacts. Fine gold wires are used to connect semiconductor devices to their packages through a process known as wire bonding.

===Commercial chemistry===
Gold is attacked by and dissolves in alkaline solutions of potassium or sodium cyanide, to form the salt gold cyanide—a technique that has been used in extracting metallic gold from ores in the cyanide process. Gold cyanide is the electrolyte used in commercial electroplating of gold onto base metals and electroforming.

Gold chloride (chloroauric acid) solutions are used to make colloidal gold by reduction with citrate or ascorbate ions. Gold chloride and gold oxide are used to make cranberry or red-colored glass, which, like colloidal gold suspensions, contains evenly sized spherical gold nanoparticles. 

==Cultural history==
 ]]
  of Tutankhamun]] calyx krater, ca. 340–330 BC.]]
 , Campania]]
 Nahal Kana Bronze Age.

Egyptian hieroglyphs from as early as 2600 BC describe gold, which king Tushratta of the Mitanni claimed was "more plentiful than dirt" in Egypt.  Egypt and especially Nubia had the resources to make them major gold-producing areas for much of history. The earliest known map is known as the Turin Papyrus Map and shows the plan of a gold mine in Nubia together with indications of the local geology. The primitive working methods are described by both Strabo and Diodorus Siculus, and included fire-setting. Large mines were also present across the Red Sea in what is now Saudi Arabia.

The legend of the  ), the story of   as having streets "made of pure gold, clear as crystal". Exploitation of gold in the south-east corner of the Black Sea is said to date from the time of Midas, and this gold was important in the establishment of what is probably the worlds earliest coinage in Lydia around 610 BC.  From the 6th or 5th century BC, the Chu (state) circulated the Ying Yuan, one kind of square gold coin.
 aqueducts enabled them to sluice most of a large alluvial deposit. The mines at Roşia Montană in Transylvania were also very large, and until very recently, still mined by opencast methods. They also exploited smaller deposits in Roman Britain|Britain, such as placer and hard-rock deposits at Dolaucothi. The various methods they used are well described by Pliny the Elder in his encyclopedia Naturalis Historia written towards the end of the first century AD.

During Mansa Musas (ruler of the Mali Empire from 1312 to 1337) hajj to Mecca in 1324, he passed through Cairo in July 1324, and was reportedly accompanied by a camel train that included thousands of people and nearly a hundred camels where he gave away so much gold that it depressed the price in Egypt for over a decade.  A contemporary Arab historian remarked:

 

The Portuguese overseas expansion started in 1415 with the taking of Ceuta, to control the gold trade coming across the desert. Although the caravan trade routes were then diverted, the Portuguese continued expansing southwards along the coast and eventually buying the gold directly (or less indirectly) from the Africans in the Gulf of Guinea. 
 Native American Montezuma was killed, most of this gold was shipped to Spain.  However, for the indigenous peoples of North America gold was considered useless and they saw much greater value in other minerals which were directly related to their utility, such as obsidian, flint, and slate. 

Gold played a role in western culture, as a cause for desire and of corruption, as told in childrens fables like Rumplestiltskin, where the peasants daughter turns hay into gold, in return for giving up her child when she becomes a princess, and stealing the hen that lays golden eggs in Jack and the beanstalk.

The top prize at the Olympic games is the gold medal.

There is an age-old tradition of biting gold to test its authenticity. Although this is certainly not a professional way of examining gold, the bite test was not to check if the coin was gold (90% gold coins are fairly strong) but to see if the coin was gold plated lead. A lead coin would be very soft and thus teeth marks would result. Fake gold coins were a common problem before 1932 so weighing a coin and also sliding a coin through a "counterfeit detector" slot was common (making a lead coin thicker would add weight thus why slide it through a measured slot). Most establishments (especially US Western saloons) would never accept a gold (or silver) coin of high value before weighing such an item. 

75% of all gold ever produced has been extracted since 1910.    It has been estimated that all gold ever refined would form a single cube 20&nbsp;m (66&nbsp;ft) on a side (equivalent to 8,000 m 3 ). 
 alchemists was circle with astrological symbol and the ancient Chinese character for the Sun.

Golden treasures have been rumored to be found at various locations, following tragedies such as the Jewish temple treasures in the Vatican, following the temples destruction in 70 AD, a gold stash on the Titanic, the Nazi gold train – following World War II.
 crowns were made of gold, and gold was used for the bridal crown since antiquity. An ancient Talmudic text circa 100 AD describes Rachel, Rabbi Akibas wife asking for a "Jerusalem of Gold" (crown). A Greek burial crown made of gold was found in a grave circa 370 BC.

==Occurrence==
 , known as the Mojave Nugget, was found by an individual prospector in the Southern California Desert using a metal detector.]]
 heavy elements like gold) into the region of space in which they later condensed into our solar system and the Earth.  Because the Earth was molten when it was just formed, almost all of the gold present on Earth sank into the core. Most of the gold that is present today in the Earths crust and mantle was delivered to Earth by asteroid impacts during the late heavy bombardment. 

On Earth, gold is found in ores in rock formed from the Precambrian time onward.  It most often occurs as a native metal, typically in a metal solid solution with silver (i.e. as a gold silver alloy). Such alloys usually have a silver content of 8–10%. Electrum is elemental gold with more than 20% silver. Electrums color runs from golden-silvery to silvery, dependent upon the silver content. The more silver, the lower the specific gravity.
 nuggets  that have been eroded from rocks and end up in alluvial deposits called placer deposits. Such free gold is always richer at the surface of gold-bearing veins  owing to the oxidation of accompanying minerals followed by weathering, and washing of the dust into streams and rivers, where it collects and can be welded by water action to form nuggets.

 , Japan.]]
  cube was oxidized to hematite. Note cubic shape of cavity.]]

Gold sometimes occurs combined with   (Cu 3 Au), novodneprite (AuPb 3 ) and weishanite ((Au, Ag) 3 Hg 2 ).

Recent research suggests that microbes can sometimes play an important role in forming gold deposits, transporting and precipitating gold to form grains and nuggets that collect in alluvial deposits. 

Another recent study has claimed water in faults vaporizes during an earthquake, depositing gold. When an earthquake strikes, it moves along a fault (geology)|fault. Water often lubricates faults, filling in fractures and jogs. About 6 miles (10 kilometers) below the surface, under incredible temperatures and pressures, the water carries high concentrations of carbon dioxide, silica, and gold. During an earthquake, the fault jog suddenly opens wider. The water inside the void instantly vaporizes, flashing to steam and forcing silica, which forms the mineral quartz, and gold out of the fluids and onto nearby surfaces. 

=== Seawater === quadrillion (about 10–30 g/km 3 ). In general, gold concentrations for Atlantic and Pacific samples are the same (~50 fmol/L) but less certain. Mediterranean deep waters contain higher concentrations of gold (100–150 fmol/L) attributed to wind-blown dust and/or rivers. At 10 parts per quadrillion the Earths oceans would hold 15,000 tonnes of gold.  These figures are three orders of magnitude less than reported in the literature prior to 1988, indicating contamination problems with the earlier data.

A number of people have claimed to be able to economically recover gold from sea water, but so far they have all been either mistaken or acted in an intentional deception. Prescott Jernegan ran a gold-from-seawater swindle in the United States in the 1890s. A British fraudster ran the same scam in England in the early 1900s.  Fritz Haber (the German in