 
   esoteric method, discipline and school of thought. A traditional Kabbalist in Judaism is called a Mekubal ( ).
 Occultist Syncretism|syncretic ontological questions. It also presents methods to aid understanding of these concepts and to thereby attain spiritual realisation.
 Hebrew Bible transmitted dimension, religious observances. 
 Southern France Ottoman Palestine. contemporary spirituality, flourishing emergence academic investigation.

== Overview ==
According to the Zohar, a foundational text for kabbalistic thought, Torah study can proceed along four levels of interpretation (exegesis).   These four levels are called Pardes (Jewish exegesis)|pardes from their initial letters (PRDS  , orchard).
* Peshat (  lit. "simple"): the direct interpretations of meaning. allegoric meanings (through allusion).
* Derash (  from Heb. darash: "inquire" or "seek"): midrashic (Rabbinic) meanings, often with imaginative comparisons with similar words or verses.
* Sod (  lit. "secret" or "mystery"): the inner, esoteric (Metaphysics|metaphysical) meanings, expressed in kabbalah.
 heretical and antithetical to Judaism. After the Medieval Kabbalah, and especially after its 16th-century development and synthesis, Kabbalah replaced Jewish philosophy (hakira) as the mainstream traditional Jewish theology,  both in scholarly circles and in the popular imagination. With the arrival of modernity, through the influence of haskalah, this has changed among non-Orthodox Jewish denominations, although its 20th-century academic study and cross-denominational spiritual applications (especially through Neo-Hasidism) has reawakened a following beyond Orthodox Judaism|Orthodoxy.
 Hasidism in eastern Europe, and its new notions of mystical leadership.
 theosophical tradition magical aims of Practical Kabbalah. Moshe Idel, for example, writes that these 3 basic models can be discerned operating and competing throughout the whole history of Jewish mysticism, beyond the particular Kabbalistic background of the Middle Ages.  They can be readily distinguished by their basic intent with respect to God: Theosophical tradition of Theoretical Kabbalah (the main focus of the Zohar and Isaac Luria|Luria) seeks to understand and describe the divine realm. As an alternative to rationalist Jewish philosophy, particularly Maimonides Aristotelianism, this speculation became the central component of Kabbalah Ecstatic tradition Abulafia and Isaac of Acre) strives to achieve a mystical union with God. Abraham Abulafias "Prophetic Kabbalah" was the supreme example of this, though marginal in Kabbalistic development, and his alternative to the program of theosophical Kabbalah
* The Theurgy|Magico-theurgical tradition of Practical Kabbalah (in often unpublished manuscripts) endeavours to alter both the Divine realms and the World. While some interpretations of prayer see its role as manipulating heavenly forces, Practical Kabbalah properly involved white-magical acts, and was censored by kabbalists for only those completely pure of intent. Consequently it formed a separate minor tradition shunned from Kabbalah

According to traditional belief, early kabbalistic knowledge was transmitted orally by the Patriarchs, Neviim|prophets, and sages (hakhamim in Hebrew), eventually to be "interwoven" into Jewish religious writings and culture. According to this view, early kabbalah was, in around the 10th century BC, an open knowledge practiced by over a million people in ancient Israel.  Foreign conquests drove the Jewish spiritual leadership of the time (the Sanhedrin) to hide the knowledge and make it secret, fearing that it might be misused if it fell into the wrong hands.  The Sanhedrin leaders were also concerned that the practice of kabbalah by Jews of the Jewish diaspora, unsupervised and unguided by the masters, might lead them into wrong practice and forbidden ways. As a result, the kabbalah became secretive, forbidden and esoteric to Judaism (Torat HaSod  ) for two and a half millennia. 
 ecstatic with theosophical mysticism. It is therefore important to bear in mind when discussing things such as the sefirot and their interactions that one is dealing with highly abstract concepts that at best can only be understood intuitively. 

=== Difference between Jewish and non-Jewish Cabala ===
  Shaarei Ora]] Hermetic occultists. Syncretic traditions connotations forbidden within Judaism, where Jewish theurgic Practical Kabbalah was a minor, permitted tradition restricted for a few elite. Today, many publications on Kabbalah belong to the non-Jewish New Age and occult traditions of Cabala, rather than giving an accurate picture of Judaic Kabbalah.  Instead, academic and traditional publications now translate and study Judaic Kabbalah for wide readership.

== History of Jewish mysticism ==
 
 
=== Origins of Judaic mysticism ===
According to the traditional understanding, Kabbalah dates from Eden.  It came down from a remote past as a revelation to elect Tzadikim (righteous people), and, for the most part, was preserved only by a privileged few. Talmudic Judaism records its view of the proper protocol for teaching this wisdom, as well as many of its concepts, in the Talmud, Tractate Hagigah, Ch.2.

Contemporary scholarship suggests that various schools of Jewish esotericism arose at different periods of Jewish history, each reflecting not only prior forms of mysticism, but also the intellectual and cultural milieu of that historical period. Answers to questions of transmission, lineage, influence, and innovation vary greatly and cannot be easily summarised.

==== Origins of terms ====
Originally, Kabbalistic knowledge was believed to be an integral part of the Oral Torah (see also Aggadah), given by God to Moses on Mount Sinai around 13th century BCE, though there is a view that Kabbalah began with Adam.

When the Israelites arrived at their destination and settled in Canaan, for a few centuries the esoteric knowledge was referred to by its aspect practicemeditation Hitbonenut ( ),  Rebbe Nachman of Breslovs Hitbodedut ( ), translated as "being alone" or "isolating oneself", or by a different term describing the actual, desired goal of the practiceprophecy ("NeVua"  ).
 Genesis ( ) in the Torah that is believed to contain secrets of the creation of the universe and forces of nature. These terms are also mentioned in the second chapter of the Talmudic tractate Haggigah.

==== Mystic elements of the Torah ==== Chariot and Divine Seraph|Throne.]] Serpent which leads to disaster when they eat the forbidden fruit, as recorded in Genesis 3.  . From the Periphery to the Centre: Kabbalah and the Conservative Movement, United Synagogue Review, Spring 2005, Vol. 57 No. 2 
 ladder to heaven provided another example of esoteric experience. Moses encounters with the Burning bush and God on Mount Sinai are evidence of mystical events in the Torah that form the origin of Jewish mystical beliefs.
 72 letter King Saul.

=== Mystical doctrines in the Talmudic era === Hekhalot mystical literature, and as one of the four who entered the Pardes (legend)|Pardes]] Meron before 1899. A Talmudic Tannaim|Tanna, he is the mystical teacher in the central Kabbalistic work, the Zohar]] Genesis 1 and Book of Ezekiel 1:428; while the names Sitrei Torah (Hidden aspects of the Torah) (Talmud Hag. 13a) and Razei Torah (Torah secrets) (Ab. vi. 1) indicate their character as secret lore. An additional term also expanded Jewish esoteric knowledge, namely Chochmah Nistara (Hidden wisdom).
 aggadic ("legendary") Mishnaic period (1st century CE) are said to have visited the Orchard (that is, Paradise, pardes, Hebrew language|Hebrew:   lit., orchard):

 
 The Four Who Entered Paradise.

Maimonides interprets pardes as physics and not mysticism.  

=== Pre-Kabbalistic schools ===
  transcendent awe, rather than nearness, of the Divine. From the 8th to 11th centuries, the Hekhalot texts, and the proto-Kabbalistic early Sefer Yetzirah ("Book of Creation") made their way into European Jewish circles.

Another, separate influential mystical movement, shortly before the arrival there of Kabbalistic theory, was the "Chassidei Ashkenaz" ( ) or Medieval German Pietists from 1150-1250. This ethical-ascetic movement arose mostly among a single scholarly family, the Kalonymus family of the French and German Rhineland.

=== Medieval emergence of the Kabbalah === Torah commentary]]
Modern scholars have identified several mystical brotherhoods that functioned in Europe starting in the 12th century. Some, such as the "Iyyun Circle" and the "Unique Cherub Circle", were truly esoteric, remaining largely anonymous.

There were certain Rishonim ("Elder Sages") of exoteric Judaism who are known to have been experts in Kabbalah. One of the best known is Nahmanides (the Ramban) (11941270) whose commentary on the Torah is considered to be based on Kabbalistic knowledge. Bahya ben Asher (the Rabbeinu Behaye) (d. 1340) also combined Torah commentary and Kabbalah. Another was Isaac the Blind (11601235), the teacher of Nahmanides, who is widely argued to have written the first work of classic Kabbalah, the Bahir (Book of "Brightness").
 gnostic influence Elliot Wolfson have independently argued that the impact of Maimonides can be seen in the change from orality to writing in the 13th century.  That is, Kabbalists committed to writing many of their oral traditions in part as a response to the attempt of Maimonides to explain the older esoteric subjects philosophically.
 Orthodox Jews Isaac Luria Arizal. Historians generally date the start of Kabbalah as a major influence in Jewish thought and practice with the publication of the Zohar and climaxing with the spread of the Arizals teachings. The majority of Haredi Jews accept the Zohar as the representative of the Maaseh Merkavah and Maaseh Breshit that are referred to in Talmudic texts. 

=== Early Modern era: Lurianic Kabbalah ===
 
  invigorated mainstream Judaism through new legal, liturgical, exegetical and Lurianic-mythological developments]] expulsion from Moses Cordovero and his school popularised the teachings of the Zohar which had until then been only a restricted work. Cordoveros comprehensive works achieved the systemisation of preceding Kabbalah. The author of the Shulkhan Arukh (the normative Jewish "Code of Law"), Rabbi Yosef Karo (14881575), was also a scholar of Kabbalah who kept a personal mystical diary. Moshe Alshich wrote a mystical commentary on the Torah, and Shlomo Alkabetz wrote Kabbalistic commentaries and poems.
 Hayim Vital and Israel Sarug. Both transcribed Lurias teachings (in variant forms) gaining them widespread popularity, Sarug taking Lurianic Kabbalah to Europe, Vital authoring the latterly canonical version. Lurias teachings came to rival the influence of the Zohar and Luria stands, alongside Moses de Leon, as the most influential mystic in Jewish history.

==== Ban on studying Kabbalah ====
 
The ban on studying Kabbalah was lifted by the efforts of the 16th-century kabbalist Rabbi Avraham Azulai (15701643).

 

The question, however, is whether the ban ever existed in the first place. Concerning the above quote by Avraham Azulai, it has found many versions in English, another is this

 

The lines concerning the year 1490 are also missing from the Hebrew edition of Hesed LAvraham, the source work that both of these quote from. Furthermore, by Azulais view the ban was lifted thirty years before his birth, a time that would have corresponded with Haim Vitals publication of the teaching of Isaac Luria. Moshe Isserles understood there to be only a minor restriction, in his words, "Ones belly must be full of meat and wine, discerning between the prohibited and the permitted."  He is supported by the Bier Hetiv, the Pithei Teshuva as well as the Vilna Gaon. The Vilna Gaon says, "There was never any ban or enactment restricting the study of the wisdom of Kabbalah. Any who says there is has never studied Kabbalah, has never seen PaRDeS, and speaks as an ignoramous." 

==== Sefardi and Mizrahi ====
  Jerusalem. Oriental Judaism has its own chain of Kabbalah]] Sefardi (Portuguese Mizrahi (Middle East, North Africa, and the Caucasus) Torah scholars has a long history. Kabbalah in various forms was widely studied, commented upon, and expanded by North African, Turkish, Yemenite, and Asian scholars from the 16th century onward. It flourished among Sefardic Jews in Tzfat (Safed), Israel even before the arrival of Isaac Luria. Yosef Karo, author of the Shulchan Arukh was part of the Tzfat school of Kabbalah. Shlomo Alkabetz, author of the hymn Lekhah Dodi, taught there.

His disciple Moses ben Jacob Cordovero authored Pardes Rimonim, an organised, exhaustive compilation of kabbalistic teachings on a variety of subjects up to that point. Cordovero headed the academy of Tzfat until his death, when Isaac Luria rose to prominence. Rabbi Moshes disciple Eliyahu De Vidas authored the classic work, Reishit Chochma, combining kabbalistic and mussar (moral) teachings. Chaim Vital also studied under Cordovero, but with the arrival of Luria became his main disciple. Vital claimed to be the only one authorised to transmit the Aris teachings, though other disciples also published books presenting Lurias teachings.
 Hida (17241806), Abuhatzeira dynasty.

==== Maharal ====
  of Prague articulated a mystical exegesis in philosophical language]] mystical and philosophical approaches Przysucha school. During the 20th century, Isaac Hutner (19061980) continued to spread the Maharals works indirectly through his own teachings and publications within the Lithuanian Jews|non-Hasidic yeshiva world.

==== Sabbatian mysticism ====
  Chmielnicki Uprising (16481654), the largest single massacre of Jews until the Holocaust, and it was at this time that a controversial scholar by the name of Sabbatai Zevi (16261676) captured the hearts and minds of the Jewish masses of that time with the promise of a newly minted messianic Millennialism in the form of his own personage.
 apostate to Ottoman Sultan and threatened with execution for attempting a plan to conquer the world and rebuild the Temple in Jerusalem. Unwilling to give up their messianic expectations, a minority of Zvis Jewish followers converted to Islam along with him.

Many of his followers, known as Sabbateans|Sabbatians, continued to worship him in secret, explaining his conversion not as an effort to save his life but to recover the sparks of the holy in each religion, and most leading rabbis were always on guard to root them out. The Donmeh movement in modern Turkey is a surviving remnant of the Sabbatian schism.

Due to the chaos caused in the Jewish world, the Rabbinic prohibition against studying Kabbalah established itself firmly within the Jewish religion. One of the conditions allowing a man to study and engage himself in the Kabbalah was to be of age forty. This age requirement came about during this period and is not Talmudic in origin but Rabbinic. Many Jews are familiar with this ruling, but are not aware of its origins.  Moreover, the prohibition is not halakhic in nature. According to Moses Cordovero, halakhically, one must be of age twenty to engage in the Kabbalah. Many famous kabbalists, including the Isaac Luria|ARI, Rabbi Nachman of Breslov, Yehuda Ashlag, were younger than twenty when they began.

==== Frankism ==== Frankists who were disciples of Jacob Frank (17261791) who eventually became an apostate to Judaism by apparently converting to Catholicism. This era of disappointment did not stem the Jewish masses yearnings for "mystical" leadership.

==== Modern era traditional Kabbalah ====
  as the start of modern Hebrew literature]] opposition to Hasidism, was a Kabbalist who opposed Hasidic doctrinal and practical innovations]] Hebrew style, all of which gained the attention of both admirers and rabbinical critics who feared another "Shabbetai Zevi (false messiah) in the making". He was forced to close his school by his rabbinical opponents, hand over and destroy many of his most precious unpublished kabbalistic writings, and go into exile in the Netherlands. He eventually moved to the Land of Israel. Some of his most important works, such as Derekh Hashem, survive and are used as a gateway to the world of Jewish mysticism.
 Elijah of Vilna (Vilna Gaon) (17201797), based in Lithuania, had his teachings encoded and publicised by his disciples such as by Rabbi Chaim Volozhin who published the mystical-ethical work Nefesh HaChaim . However, he was staunchly opposed to the new Hasidic movement and warned against their public displays of religious fervour inspired by the mystical teachings of their rabbis. Although the Vilna Gaon was not in favor of the Hasidic movement, he did not prohibit the study and engagement in the Kabbalah. This is evident from his writings in the Even Shlema. "He that is able to understand secrets of the Torah and does not try to understand them will be judged harshly, may God have mercy". (The Vilna Gaon, Even Shlema, 8:24). "The Redemption will only come about through learning Torah, and the essence of the Redemption depends upon learning Kabbalah" (The Vilna Gaon, Even Shlema, 11:3).
 Oriental tradition meditation into communal prayer.

In the 20th century, Yehuda Ashlag (18851954) in Mandate Palestine, was a leading esoteric kabbalist in the traditional mode, who translated the Zohar into Hebrew with a new approach in Lurianic Kabbalah.

==== Hasidic Judaism ====
  internal Hasidic philosophy|correspondence]] Divine Omnipresence Nistarim circles schools of leadership became dynastic. Among later Hasidic schools:
 Hasidic dynasties and taught that each Hasid must "search for the tzaddik (saintly/righteous person)" for himself and within himself.
 rational investigation with explanation of Kabbalah through articulating unity in a common Divine essence. In recent times, the messianic element latent in Hasidism has come to the fore in Habad.

==== 20th century influence ==== philosophical works. Lurianic symbols Holocaust theologians. 

== Concepts ==
=== Concealed and Revealed God ===
  within the Ein Sof]]
The nature of the  , absolutely Divine transcendence|transcendent, unknowable, limitless Divine simplicity, and (b) God in manifestation, the revealed persona of God through which He creates and sustains and relates to mankind. Kabbalists speak of the first as Ein Sof|Ein/Ayn Sof (  "the infinite/endless", literally "that which has no limits"). Of the impersonal Ein Sof nothing can be grasped. The second aspect of Divine Ohr|emanations, however, are accessible to human perception, dynamically interacting throughout spiritual and physical existence, reveal the Divine Divine immanence|immanently, and are bound up in the life of man. Kabbalists believe that these two aspects are not contradictory but complement one another, emanations revealing the concealed mystery from within the Godhead.
 Genesis BeReishit manifestation in Creation:

 
 Names of Olamot (Spiritual Archetypal Man, Chariot and Kelipot shells, 613 channels ("limbs" of the King) and the Divine souls in man. Kabbalists see all aspects as unified through their absolute dependence on their source in the Ein Sof.

=== Sefirot and the Divine Feminine ===
 
  in 3 columns, as a tree with roots above and branches below]] Light in anthropomorphic harmony completing Creation. As the spiritual foundation of Creation, the sephirot correspond to the names of God in Judaism and the particular nature of any entity.

==== Ten Sefirot as process of Creation   ====
 
According to Lurianic cosmology, the sefirot correspond to various levels of creation (ten sefirot in each of the Four Worlds, and four worlds within each of the larger four worlds, each containing ten sefirot, which themselves contain ten sefirot, to an infinite number of possibilities),  and are emanated from the Creator for the purpose of creating the universe. The sefirot are considered revelations of the Creators will (ratzon),  and they should not be understood as ten different "gods" but as ten different ways the one God reveals his will through the Emanations. It is not God who changes but the ability to perceive God that changes.

Altogether, eleven sefirot are named. However Keter and Daat are unconscious and conscious dimensions of one principle, conserving 10 forces. The names of the sefirot in descending order are:
* Keter (Kabbalah)|Keter (supernal crown, representing above-conscious will)
* Chokhmah (Kabbalah)|Chochmah (the highest potential of thought)
* Binah (Kabbalah)|Binah (the understanding of the potential)
* Daat|Daat (intellect of knowledge)
* Chesed (Kabbalah)|Chesed (sometimes referred to as Gedolah-greatness) (loving-kindness)
* Gevurah (Kabbalah)|Gevurah (sometimes referred to as Din-justice or Pachad-fear) (severity/strength) Rachamim also known as Tiphereth (mercy)
* Netzach (Kabbalah)|Netzach (victory/eternity)
* Hod (Kabbalah)|Hod (glory/splendour)
* Yesod (Kabbalah)|Yesod (foundation)
* Malkuth (kingdom)

==== Ten Sefirot as process of ethics   ====
 
 , related to Kabbalistic meditation]]
Divine creation by means of the Ten Sefirot is an ethical process. They represent the different aspects of Morality. Loving-Kindness is a possible moral justification found in Chessed, and Gevurah is the Moral Justification of Justice and both are mediated by Mercy which is Rachamim. However, these pillars of morality become immoral once they become extremes. When Loving-Kindness become extreme it can lead to sexual depravity and lack of Justice to the wicked. When Justice becomes extreme, it can lead to torture and the Murder of innocents and unfair punishment.
 golden mean in kabbalah, corresponding to the sefirah of Adornment (Tiferet) being part of the "Middle Column".
 Musar text. 

=== Descending spiritual Worlds ===
 
Medieval Kabbalists believed that all things are linked to God through these emanations, making all levels in creation part of one great, gradually descending chain of being. Through this any lower creation reflects its particular characteristics in Supernal Divinity.
 monistic panentheism. According to this philosophy, Gods existence is higher than anything that this world can express, yet he includes all things of this world within his Divine reality in perfect unity, so that the Creation effected no change in him at all. This paradox is dealt with at length in Chabad texts. 

=== Origin of evil ===
 
 , but allowed amulets by Sages ]]
 Scholem termed this element of the Spanish Kabbalah a "Jewish Gnosticism|gnostic" motif, in the sense of dual powers in the divine realm of manifestation. In a radical notion, the root of evil is found within the 10 holy Sephirot, through an imbalance of Gevurah, the power of "Strength/Judgement/Severity".
 Chesed ("loving-kindness"), restricting the unlimited divine bounty within suitable vessels, so forming the Worlds. However, if man sins (actualising impure judgement within his soul), the supernal Judgement is reciprocally empowered over the Kindness, introducing disharmony among the Sephirot in the divine realm and exile from God throughout Creation. The demonic realm, though illusory in its holy origin, becomes the real apparent realm of impurity in lower Creation.

=== Role of Man ===
 s role as both legalist and mystic underscores Kabbalahs spiritualisation of normative Jewish observance]] universalised to Jewish practice. Hasidic popularisation of kabbalah, could replace esoteric abilities. Many kabbalists were also leading legal figures in Judaism, such as Nachmanides and Joseph Karo.
 uniting masculine Divine presence Holy One Jewish messianic rectification of rationalist human-centred providential cosmic significance to the daily events in the worldly life of man in general, and the spiritual role of Jewish observance in particular.

=== Levels of the soul ===
 s meditations included the "inner illumination of" the human form ]]
The Kabbalah posits that the human soul has three elements, the nefesh, ruach, and neshamah. The nefesh is found in all humans, and enters the physical body at birth. It is the source of ones physical and psychological nature. The next two parts of the soul are not implanted at birth, but can be developed over time; their development depends on the actions and beliefs of the individual. They are said to only fully exist in people awakened spiritually. A common way of explaining the three parts of the soul is as follows:

*Nefesh (): the lower part, or "animal part", of the soul. It is linked to  . This part of the soul is provided at birth. good and evil. the afterlife. It allows one to have some awareness of the existence and presence of God.

The Raaya Meheimna, a section of related teachings spread throughout the Zohar, discusses fourth and fifth parts of the human soul, the chayyah and yehidah (first mentioned in the Midrash Rabbah). Gershom Scholem writes that these "were considered to represent the sublimest levels of intuitive cognition, and to be within the grasp of only a few chosen individuals". The Chayyah and the Yechidah do not enter into the body like the other threethus they received less attention in other sections of the Zohar.

*Chayyah (): The part of the soul that allows one to have an awareness of the divine life force itself.
*Yehidah (): The highest plane of the soul, in which one can achieve as full a union with God as is possible.

Both rabbinic and kabbalistic works posit that there are a few additional, non-permanent states of the soul that people can develop on certain occasions. These extra souls, or extra states of the soul, play no part in any afterlife scheme, but are mentioned for completeness:
 Abraham Abulafia for differing views of this matter.
*Neshamah Yeseira: The "supplemental soul" that a Jew can experience on Shabbat. It makes possible an enhanced spiritual enjoyment of the day. This exists only when one is observing Shabbat; it can be lost and gained depending on ones observance.
*Neshamah Kedosha: Provided to Jews at the age of maturity (13 for boys, 12 for girls), and is related to the study and fulfillment of the Torah commandments. It exists only when one studies and follows Torah; it can be lost and gained depending on ones study and observance.

=== Reincarnation ===
  Jewish philosophers. However, the Kabbalists explained a number of scriptural passages in reference to Gilgulim. The concept became central to the later Kabbalah of Isaac Luria, who systemised it as the personal parallel to the cosmic process of Tohu and Tikun|rectification. Through Lurianic Kabbalah and Hasidic Judaism, reincarnation entered popular Jewish culture as a literary motif.

=== Tzimtzum, Shevirah and Tikun ===
  Lurianic thought]] Cordovero and Luria in rationally influenced Lurianic doctrines Shevirah and Tikun reorganised Kabbalistic doctrine around crisis-catharsis Divine exile and redemption, explaining Jewish messianism in Kabbalah.
 Infinite Light, anthropomorphism of the partzufim accenuates the sexual unifications of the redemption process, while Gilgul reincarnation emerges from the scheme. Uniquely, Lurianism gave formerly private mysticism the urgency of Messianic social involvement.
 Giving of the Torah to begin Messianic rectification. Historical and individual history becomes the narrative of reclaiming exiled Divine sparks.

=== Linguistic mysticism of Hebrew ===
 
 
  of Hebrew letters in Creation]] Biblical and Hebrew letter, Tree of Tree of Life. In Lurianic expression, each of the 600,000 souls of Israel find their own interpretation in Torah.

 
 encoded messages and hidden meanings. Gematria is one method for discovering its hidden meanings. Each letter in Hebrew also represents a number; Hebrew, unlike many other languages, never developed a separate numerical alphabet. By converting letters to numbers, Kabbalists were able to find a hidden meaning in each word. This method of interpretation was used extensively by various schools.

== Primary texts ==
 , main sourcebook of Kabbalah, from Mantua, Italy in 1558]]
 
  oral tradition, though, over the centuries, much of the oral tradition has been written down.

Jewish forms of   of the second and first pre-Christian centuries and which contained elements that carried over to later kabbalah.
 Bible commentaries Pardes Rimonim, Etz Chayim. Nefesh HaChaim Hasidic development of kabbalah incorporates a successive stage of Jewish mysticism from historical kabbalistic metaphysics. 

== Scholarship ==
  rational terms emancipatory Haskalah spirit of their age. They opposed kabbalah and restricted its significance from Jewish historiography. In the mid-20th century, it was left to Gershom Scholem to overturn their stance, establishing the flourishing present-day academic investigation of Jewish mysticism, and making Heichalot, Kabbalistic and Hasidic texts the objects of scholarly critical-historical study. In Scholems opinion, the mythical and mystical components of Judaism were at least as important as the rational ones, and he thought that they, rather than the exoteric Halakha, were the living current in historical Jewish development.
 Daniel Matt  and Ada Rapoport-Albert.
 Ecstatic Kabbalah historical that anthropology and comparative studies. 

=== Claims for authority ===
Historians have noted that most claims for the authority of kabbalah involve an argument of the antiquity of authority (see, e.g., Joseph Dans discussion in his Circle of the Unique Cherub). As a result, virtually all early foundational works pseudepigraphically claim, or are ascribed, ancient authorship. For example, Sefer Raziel HaMalach, an Practical Kabbalah|astro-magical text partly based on a magical manual of late antiquity, Sefer ha-Razim, was, according to the kabbalists, transmitted by the angel Raziel to Adam after he was evicted from Garden of Eden|Eden.

Another famous work, the early Sefer Yetzirah, supposedly dates back to the patriarch Abraham. This tendency toward pseudepigraphy has its roots in apocalyptic literature, which claims that esoteric knowledge such as magic (paranormal)|magic, divination and astrology was transmitted to humans in the mythic past by the two angels, Aza and Azazel|Azazel (in other places, Azazel and Uzazel) who fell from heaven (see Genesis 6:4).

== Criticism ==
 

=== Dualistic cosmology ===
Although Kabbalah propounds the Unity of God, one of the most serious and sustained criticisms is that it may lead away from  , believes creation is ontologically divided between good and evil forces; the second, found largely in Greco-Roman metaphysics like Neo-Platonism, argues that the universe knew a primordial harmony, but that a cosmic disruption yielded a second, evil, dimension to reality. This second model influenced the cosmology of the Kabbalah.

According to Kabbalistic cosmology, the Ten Sefirot correspond to ten levels of creation. These levels of creation must not be understood as ten different "gods" but as ten different ways of revealing God, one per level. It is not God who changes but the ability to perceive God that changes.

While God may seem to exhibit dual natures (masculine-feminine, compassionate-judgmental, creator-creation), all adherents of Kabbalah have consistently stressed the ultimate unity of God. For example, in all discussions of Male and Female, the hidden nature of God exists above it all without limit, being called the Infinite or the "No End" (Ein Sof)neither one nor the other, transcending any definition. The ability of God to become hidden from perception is called "Restriction" (Tzimtzum). Hiddenness makes creation possible because God can become "revealed" in a diversity of limited ways, which then form the building blocks of creation.

Kabbalistic texts, including the Zohar, appear to affirm dualism, as they ascribe all evil to the separation from holiness known as the Sitra Achra  ("the other side") which is opposed to Sitra DKedushah, or the Side of Holiness.  The "left side" of divine emanation is a negative mirror image of the "side of holiness" with which it was locked in combat.  . While this evil aspect exists within the divine structure of the Sefirot, the Zohar indicates that the Sitra Ahra has no power over Ein Sof, and only exists as a necessary aspect of the creation of God to give man free choice, and that evil is the consequence of this choice. It is not a supernatural force opposed to God, but a reflection of the inner moral combat within mankind between the dictates of morality and the surrender to ones basic instincts.

Rabbi Dr. David Gottlieb notes that many Kabbalists hold that the concepts of, e.g., a Heavenly Court or the Sitra Ahra are only given to humanity by God as a working model to understand His ways within our own epistemological limits. They reject the notion that a satan or angels actually exist. Others hold that non-divine spiritual entities were indeed created by God as a means for exacting his will.

According to Kabbalists, humans cannot yet understand the infinity of God. Rather, there is God as revealed to humans (corresponding to Zeir Anpin), and the rest of the infinity of God as remaining hidden from human experience (corresponding to Arich Anpin).  One reading of this theology is monotheistic, similar to panentheism; another reading of the same theology is that it is dualistic. Gershom Scholem writes:

 Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism Shocken Books (p.1112)}}

=== Distinction between Jews and non-Jews ===
A number of medieval Kabbalistic sources contain statements to the effect that the Jewish soul is ontologically different from the soul of non-Jews; for example, it is held by some that Jews have three levels of soul, nefesh, ruach and neshamah while non-Jews have only nefesh. The Zohar comments on the Biblical verse which states "Let the waters teem with swarms of creatures that have a living soul" as follows: "The verse creatures that have a living soul, pertains to the Jews, for they are the children of God, and from God come their holy souls....And the souls of the other nations, from where do they come? Rabbi Elazar says that they have souls from the impure left side, and therefore they are all impure, defiling anyone who comes near them" (Zohar commentary on Genesis).

Such theologically framed hostility may have been a response to some medieval demonization of Jews which developed in some parts of Western and Christian society and thought, starting with the Patristic writings.  righteous Gentiles idol worshippers; Satmar Hasidim.

Some later Kabbalistic works build and elaborate on these ideas. One point of view is represented by the Hasidic work   (b. 1745), can achieve a high level of spirituality, similar to an angel, his soul is still fundamentally different in character, but not value, from a Jewish one.  A similar view is found in early medieval philosophical book Kuzari, by Yehuda Halevi (1075-1141 AD).

On the other hand, many prominent Kabbalists rejected this idea and believed in essential equality of all human souls. Menahem Azariah da Fano (15481620), in his book Reincarnations of souls, provides many examples of non-Jewish Biblical figures being reincarnated into Jews and vice versa; the contemporary Habad Rabbi and mystic Dov Ber Pinson teaches that distinctions between Jews and non-Jews in works such as the Tanya are not to be understood as literally referring to the external properties of a person (what religious community they are born into), but rather as referring to the properties of souls as they can be re-incarnated in any religious community. Dov Ber Pinson, Reincarnation and Judaism 

Another prominent Habad Rabbi, Abraham Yehudah Khein (b. 1878), believed that spiritually elevated Gentiles have essentially Jewish souls, "who just lack the formal conversion to Judaism", and that unspiritual Jews are "Jewish merely by their birth documents".  The great 20th-century Kabbalist Yehuda Ashlag viewed the terms "Jews" and "Gentile" as different levels of perception, available to every human soul.

David Halperin  argues that the collapse of Kabbalahs influence among Western European Jews over the course of the 17th and 18th century was a result of the cognitive dissonance they experienced between the negative perception of Gentiles found in some exponents of Kabbalah, and their own positive dealings with non-Jews, which were rapidly expanding and improving during this period due to the influence of the Enlightenment.

However, a number of renowned Kabbalists claimed the exact opposite. In their view, Kabbalah transcends the borders of Judaism and can serve as a basis of inter-religious theosophy and a universal religion. Rabbi Pinchas Elijah Hurwitz, a prominent Lithuanian-Galician Kabbalist of the 18th century and a moderate proponent of the Haskalah, called for brotherly love and solidarity between all nations, and believed that Kabbalah can empower everyone, Jews and Gentiles alike, with prophetic abilities. 
 humanistic ideals Christian and pagan mystics.
 pagan mysteries according to the Kabbalistic theosophy. 

For a different perspective, see Wolfson.  He provides numerous examples from the 17th to the 20th centuries, which would challenge the view of Halperin cited above as well as the notion that "modern Judaism" has rejected or dismissed this "outdated aspect" of the religion and, he argues, there are still Kabbalists today who harbor this view. He argues that, while it is accurate to say that many Jews do and would find this distinction offensive, it is inaccurate to say that the idea has been totally rejected in all circles. As Wolfson has argued, it is an ethical demand on the part of scholars to continue to be vigilant with regard to this matter and in this way the tradition can be refined from within.

However, as explained above, many well known Kabbalists rejected the literal interpretation of these seemingly discriminatory views. They argued that the term "Jew" was to be interpreted metaphorically, as referring to the spiritual development of the soul, rather than the superficial denomination of the individual, and they added a chain of intermediary states between "Jews" and idol worshippers, or spiritualised the very definition of "Jews" and "non-Jews" and argued that a soul can be re-incarnated in different communities (whether Jewish or not) as much as within a single one. 

=== Medieval views ===
  on the Knesset Menorah, Maimonides holding Aristotles work]] Jewish Neoplatonists]]
The idea that there are ten divine sefirot could evolve over time into the idea that "God is One being, yet in that One being there are Ten" which opens up a debate about what the "correct beliefs" in God should be, according to Judaism.
 Emunot vDeot that Jews who believe in reincarnation have adopted a non-Jewish belief.

Maimonides (12th century) rejected many of the texts of the Hekalot, particularly Shiur Qomah whose starkly anthropomorphic vision of God he considered heretical.

  and originally published in 1915, specifically to explain and elaborate on the Kabbalistic concepts addressed by Nachmanides in his commentary to the Five books of Moses
 Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon, in the spirit of his father Maimonides, Rabbi Saadiah Gaon, and other predecessors, explains at length in his book Milhhamot HaShem that the Almighty is in no way literally within time or space nor physically outside time or space, since time and space simply do not apply to His Being whatsoever. This is in contrast to certain popular understandings of modern Kabbalah which teach a form of panentheism, that His essence is within everything.
 Sefer Bahir, rejecting the attribution of its authorship to the tanna Nehunya ben HaKanah|R. Nehhunya ben ha-Kanah and describing some of its content as truly heretical.
 Rabbi Yitzchak ben Sheshet Perfet (The Rivash), 13261408. Although as is evident from his response on the topic (157) the Rivash was skeptical of certain interpretations of Kabbalah popular in his time, it is equally evident that overall he did accept Kabbalah as received Jewish wisdom, and attempted to defend it from attackers. To this end he cited and rejected a certain philosopher who claimed that Kabbalah was "worse than Christianity", as it made God into 10, not just into three. Most followers of Kabbalah have never followed this interpretation of Kabbalah, on the grounds that the concept of the Christian Trinity posits that there are three persons existing within the Godhead, one of whom became a human being.   In contrast, the mainstream understanding of the Kabbalistic Sefirot holds that they have no mind or intelligence; further, they are not addressed in prayer and they cannot become a human being. They are conduits