 
 
 
  is the symbol of  

Law is a term which does not have a universally accepted definition, Lord Lloyd of Hampstead. Introduction to Jurisprudence. Third Edition. Stevens & Sons. London. 1972. Second Impression. 1975. Page 39.  but one definition is that law is a system of rules and guidelines which are enforced through social institutions to govern behavior . Robertson, Crimes against humanity, 90.  Laws are made by governments, specifically by their legislatures. The formation of laws themselves may be influenced by a constitution (written or unwritten) and the rights encoded therein. The law shapes politics, economics and society in countless ways and serves as a social mediator of relations between people.
 civil law Canon and binding precedents are accepted. Historically, religious laws played a significant role even in settling of secular matters, which is still the case in some countries, particularly Islamic.
 guilty party Civil law (not to be confused with civil law jurisdictions above) deals with the resolution of lawsuits (disputes) between individuals or organizations. These resolutions seek to provide a legal remedy (often monetary damages) to the winning litigant.
 derivatives markets. Property law regulates the transfer and title of personal property and real property. Trust law applies to assets held for investment and financial security. Tort law allows claims for compensation if a persons property is Harm principle|harmed. Constitutional law provides a framework for the creation of law, the protection of human rights and the election of political representatives. Administrative law is used to review the decisions of government agencies. International law governs affairs between sovereign states in activities ranging from trade to military action.

To implement and enforce the law and provide services to the public by public servants, a governments bureaucracy, the military and police are vital. While all these organs of the state are creatures created and bound by law, an independent legal profession and a vibrant civil society inform and support their progress .
 withered away. 

==Definition==
 

===Whether it is possible or desirable to define law===
There have been many attempts to produce "a universally acceptable definition of law". By 1972, no such definition had been produced.  McCoubrey and White said that the question "what is law?" has no simple answer.  Glanville Williams said that the meaning of the word "law" depends on the context in which that word is used. He said that, for example, "early customary law" and "municipal law" were contexts where the word "law" had two different and irreconcilable meanings.  Thurman Arnold said that it is obvious that it is impossible to define the word "law" and that it is also equally obvious that the struggle to define that word should not ever be abandoned.  It is possible to take the view that there is no need to define the word "law" (e.g. "lets forget about generalities and get down to Case law|cases"). 

===Proposed definitions===
One definition is that law is a system of rules and guidelines which are enforced through social institutions to govern behavior .  In The Concept of Law Hart argued law is a "system of rules";  Austin said law was "the command of a sovereign, backed by the threat of a sanction";  Dworkin describes law as an "interpretive concept" to achieve justice; Dworkin, Laws Empire, 410  and Raz argues law is an "authority" to mediate peoples interests.  Holmes said "The prohecies of what the courts will do in fact, and nothing more pretentious, are what I mean by the law."  Aquinas said that law is a rational ordering of things which concern the common good that is promulgated by whoever is charged with the care of the community.  This definition has both positivist and naturalist elements. 

==Legal subjects== civil law international conventions. trusts are further disciplines .

===International law===
 
 

International law can refer to three things: public international law, private international law or conflict of laws and the law of supranational organisations.
 sources for International Labour World Trade Organisation, or the International Monetary Fund. Public international law has a special status as law because there is no international police force, and courts (e.g. the International Court of Justice as the primary UN judicial organ) lack the capacity to penalise disobedience.  However, a few bodies, such as the WTO, have effective systems of binding arbitration and dispute resolution backed up by trade sanctions. 
 civil law capital and labour supply New York Convention 1958. 
 internationally accepted UN and political institutions. These institutions are allowed the ability to enforce legal norms both against or for member states and citizens in a manner which is not possible through public international law.  As the European Court of Justice said in the 1960s, European Union law constitutes "a new legal order of international law" for the mutual social and economic benefit of the member states. 

===Constitutional and administrative law===
 
 , whose principles still have constitutional value]]
 United States United Kingdom, Earl of Lord Camden, stated that,

 The great end, for which men entered into society, was to secure their property. That right is preserved sacred and incommunicable in all instances, where it has not been taken away or abridged by some public law for the good of the whole ... If no excuse can be found or produced, the silence of the books is an authority against the defendant, and the plaintiff must have judgment.  
 John Locke, the individual Conseil dÉtat Napoleon assumed power in France. Auby, Administrative Law in France, 75 

===Criminal law===
  malicious intent strict liability" crimes, an actus reus is enough.  Criminal systems of the civil law tradition distinguish between intention in the broad sense (dolus directus and dolus eventualis), and negligence. Negligence does not carry criminal responsibility unless a particular crime provides for its punishment.  

  in Salem witch trials|Salem]] self defence, Lord Coleridge, Crown commuted their sentences to six months in jail. 
 members of crimes against humanity. 

===Contract law===
 
  was held to be a unilateral contract]]

Contract law concerns enforceable promises, and can be summed up in the Latin phrase  ,  , and the element of consideration, see Beale and Tallon, Contract Law, 142–143 
 Germany has abstraction principle (Abstraktionsprinzip) means that the personal obligation of contract forms separately from the title of property being conferred. When contracts are invalidated for some reason (e.g. a car buyer is so drunk that he lacks legal capacity to contract)  the contractual obligation to pay can be invalidated separately from the proprietary title of the car. Unjust enrichment law, rather than contract law, is then used to restore title to the rightful owner. 

===Tort law===
 
 " two were involved in the longest-running case in UK history for publishing a pamphlet criticising McDonalds restaurants.]]

Torts, sometimes called   (intended for the consumption of Mrs Donoghue) in a café in Paisley. Having consumed half of it, Mrs Donoghue poured the remainder into a tumbler. The decomposing remains of a snail floated out. She claimed to have suffered from shock, fell ill with gastroenteritis and sued the manufacturer for carelessly allowing the drink to be contaminated. The House of Lords decided that the manufacturer was liable for Mrs Donoghues illness. Lord Atkin took a distinctly moral approach, and said,

 The liability for negligence ... is no doubt based upon a general public sentiment of moral wrongdoing for which the offender must pay ... The rule that you are to love your neighbour becomes in law, you must not injure your neighbour; and the lawyers question, Who is my neighbour? receives a restricted reply. You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your neighbour.  
 breached his but for remote a battery or trespass. A better known tort is slander and libel|defamation, which occurs, for example, when a newspaper makes unsupportable allegations that damage a politicians reputation.  More infamous are economic torts, which form the basis of labour law in some countries by making trade unions liable for strikes,  when statute does not provide immunity. 

===Property law===
 
 , one of the worlds first ever speculations and crashes, led to strict regulation on share trading. ]] stocks and rental agreements, company law, trusts and halfpence and that he would buy it. The boy said he would prefer the jewel back, so the apprentice gave it to him, but without the stones. The boy sued the goldsmith for his apprentices attempt to cheat him. Lord Chief Justice Pratt ruled that even though the boy could not be said to own the jewel, he should be considered the rightful keeper ("finders keeper") until the original owner is found. In fact the apprentice and the boy both had a right of Possession (law)|possession in the jewel (a technical concept, meaning evidence that something could belong to someone), but the boys possessory interest was considered better, because it could be shown to be first in time. Possession may be nine tenths of the law, but not all.
 mix our labour with our surroundings. 

===Equity and trusts===
 
 , London, early 19th century]]
 principles than market in Lord King, agreed and ordered Mr Sandford should disgorge his profits. He wrote,

 
 stock market charitable purposes, famous examples being the British Museum or the Rockefeller Foundation.

===Further disciplines===
Law spreads far beyond the core subjects into virtually every area of life. Three categories are presented for convenience, though the subjects intertwine and overlap.

;Law and society
  while on strike]]
 health and safety or a minimum wage. civil rights except Poland and the United Kingdom. 
* Civil procedure and criminal procedure concern the rules that courts must follow as a trial and appeals proceed. Both concern a citizens right to a fair trial or hearing.
* Evidence (law)|Evidence law involves which materials are admissible in courts for a case to be built. stateless individuals.
* Social security law refers to the rights people have to social insurance, such as jobseekers allowances or housing benefits.
* Family law covers marriage and divorce proceedings, the rights of children and rights to property and money in the event of separation.

;Law and commerce company began separate legal personality of the corporation. bills of Lex Mercatoria. The UK Sale of Goods Act 1979 and the US Uniform Commercial Code are examples of codified common law commercial principles. Law of maritime liens, and injuries to passengers.
* Intellectual property law aims at safeguarding creators and other producers of intellectual goods and services. These are legal rights (copyrights, trademarks, patents, and related rights) which result from intellectual activity in the industrial, literary and artistic fields.  compensation for ones own loss.
* Unjust enrichment When someone has been unjustly enriched (or there is an "absence of basis" for a transaction) at anothers expense, this event generates the right to restitution to reverse that gain. space commercialization, property, liability, and other issues.

;Law and regulation
  trading floor after the Wall Street Crash of 1929, before tougher banking regulation was introduced]]

* Tax law involves regulations that concern value added tax, corporate tax, income tax. Banking law and financial regulation set minimum standards on the amounts of capital banks must hold, and rules about best practice for investment. This is to insure against the risk of economic crises, such as the Wall Street Crash of 1929. privatisation became telecomms and water are OECD countries. Roman decrees against price fixing and the English restraint of trade doctrine. Modern competition law derives from the U.S. anti-cartel and anti-monopoly statutes (the Sherman Act and Clayton Act) of the turn of the 20th century. It is used to control businesses who attempt to use their economic influence to distort market prices at the expense of consumer welfare. Consumer law could include anything from regulations on unfair contractual terms and clauses to directives on airline baggage insurance. polluters within domestic legal systems.

==Legal systems==
  sources that jurisdictions adopt as authoritatively binding are the defining features of any legal system. Yet classification is a matter of form rather than substance, since similar rules often prevail.

===Civil law===
 
 ]]
 codifications in Babylonian Code Codex Hammurabi. Eastern Roman medieval Western Byzantine Emperor Theodosian Code Japanese and Korean legal Russia and China to Central and Latin America.  The United States follows the common law system described below.

===Common law and equity===
 
 
 Norman conquest King John Sir Thomas Lord Eldon.  In the 19th century the two systems were fused into one another. In developing the common law and equity, academic authors have always played an important part. William Blackstone, from around 1760, was the first scholar to describe and teach it.  But merely in describing, scholars who sought explanations and underlying structures slowly changed the way the law actually worked. 

===Religious law===
 
 Israeli law allows litigants to use religious laws only if they choose. Canon law is only in use by members of the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Anglican Communion.

 ]]

Until the 18th century, Sharia law was practiced throughout the   has been the call to restore the Sharia, which has generated a vast amount of literature and affected world politics. Hallaq, The Origins and Evolution of Islamic Law, 1 

==History of law==
 
 code of laws by the Mesopotamian sun god Shamash, also revered as the god of justice]]
 law code, casuistic statements King Hammurabi Codex Hammurabi. The most intact copy of these stelae was discovered in the 19th century by British Assyriologists, and has since been fully transliterated and translated into various languages, including English, German, and French. 
 Greek city-state, slave class. constitutional innovations in the development of Athenian democracy|democracy. 
 custom and Dark Ages, Napoleonic and German Codes became the most influential. In contrast to English common law, which consists of enormous tomes of case law, codes in small books are easy to export and easy for judges to apply. However, today there are signs that civil and common law are converging.  EU law is codified in treaties, but develops through the precedent laid down by the European Court of Justice.

  is the longest written constitution for a country, containing 444 articles, 12 schedules, numerous amendments and 117,369 words]]
 India and China represent Hindu tradition, Singapore and Hong Kong Taiwanese law Soviet Socialist law, which essentially inflates administrative law at the expense of private law rights.  Due to rapid industrialisation, today China is undergoing a process of reform, at least in terms of economic, if not social and political, rights. A new contract code in 1999 represented a move away from administrative domination.  Furthermore, after negotiations lasting fifteen years, in 2001 China joined the World Trade Organisation. 

==Legal theory==
 

===Philosophy of law===
 
 

The philosophy of law is commonly known as jurisprudence. Normative jurisprudence is essentially  yers on the other side, such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau, argue that law reflects essentially moral and unchangeable laws of nature. The concept of "natural law" emerged in ancient Greek philosophy concurrently and in entanglement with the notion of justice, and re-entered the mainstream of Western culture through the writings of Thomas Aquinas.

Hugo Grotius, the founder of a purely rationalistic system of natural law, argued that law arises from both a social impulse—as Aristotle had indicated—and reason.  Immanuel Kant believed a moral imperative requires laws "be chosen as though they should hold as universal laws of nature".  Jeremy Bentham and his student Austin, following Da