 
  free and fair elections, civil rights, freedom of the press, freedom of religion, free trade, and private property.               
 hereditary privilege, natural right property  and according to the social contract, governments must not violate these rights. Liberals opposed traditional conservatism and sought to replace absolutism in government with democracy and/or republicanism and the rule of law.
 tyrannical rule. Spanish America, North America.  In this period, the dominant ideological opponent of liberalism was classical conservatism.

During the twentieth century, liberal ideas spread even further, as   (1956) Liberalism in the U.S. usage has little in common with the word as used in the politics of any other country, save possibly Britain. Democratic administration of Pres. Franklin D. Roosevelt, whereas in Europe it is more commonly associated with a commitment to limited government and laissez-faire economic policies."  Consequently in America, the ideas of individualism and laissez-faire economics previously associated with classical liberalism, became the basis for the emerging school of Libertarianism|libertarian thought. 
 liberal political all inhabited continents.

==Etymology and definition==
Words such as liberal, liberty, Libertarianism|libertarian, and libertine all trace their history to the Latin liber, which means "free". Gross, p. 5.  One of the first recorded instances of the word liberal occurs in 1375, when it was used to describe the liberal arts in the context of an education desirable for a free-born man.  The words early connection with the classical education of a medieval university soon gave way to a proliferation of different denotations and connotations. Liberal could refer to "free in bestowing" as early as 1387, "made without stint" in 1433, "freely permitted" in 1530, and "free from restraint"—often as a pejorative remark—in the 16th and the 17th centuries. 
 Shakespeare wrote parties and movements all over the world. 

==History==
 
Liberalism as a political movement spans the better part of the last four centuries, though the use of the word liberalism to refer to a specific political doctrine did not occur until the 19th century. Perhaps the first modern state founded on liberal principles, with no hereditary aristocracy, was the United States of America, whose Declaration of Independence states that "all men are created equal and endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights. among these life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness," echoing John Lockes phrase "life, liberty, and property".  A few years later, the French Revolution overthrew the hereditary aristocracy, with the slogan "liberty, equality, fraternity", and was the first state in history to grant universal male suffrage. The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, first codified in 1789 in France, is a foundational document of both liberalism and human rights.

While liberal ideas were advocated by many early thinkers, including Marcus Aurelius, Cardinal Cajetan, and the School of Salamanca, most historians trace the beginnings of liberal political government to a reaction to the religious wars gripping Europe during the 16th and 17th centuries, especially in France.        The Age of Enlightenment|Enlightenment, which challenged tradition, eventually coalesced into powerful revolutionary movements that toppled archaic regimes all over the world, especially in Europe, Latin America, and North America. Liberalism fully exploded as a comprehensive movement against the old order during the French Revolution, which set the pace for the future development of human history.

===Inception to revolution===
  classical world. feudal and Counter Reformation civil war King Charles Britain emerged Palmer characterize the period in the following light:

  
 American colonies declared independence governing parliament taxation policies. escalated to legitimacy and Constitutional Convention confederated national federal structure. The United States Bill of Rights quickly followed in 1789, which guaranteed certain natural rights fundamental to liberal ideals. The American Revolution predicated a series of drastic socio-political changes across nations and continents, collectively referred to as the "Atlantic Revolutions", of which the most famous is probably the French Revolution.

===French Revolution===
  Johann von Goethe reportedly told the defeated Prussian soldiers after the Battle of Valmy that "from this place and from this time forth commences a new era in world history, and you can all say that you were present at its birth".  Historians widely regard the Revolution as one of the most important events in human history, and the onset of the Revolution in 1789 is considered by some to mark the end of the early modern period.  First Republic in 1792.]] modern era,"  and its convulsions are widely associated with "the triumph of liberalism".  For liberals, the Revolution was their defining moment, and later liberals approved of the French Revolution almost entirely—"not only its results but the act itself," as two historians noted.  The French Revolution began in May 1789 with the convocation of the Estates-General of 1789|Estates-General. The first year of the Revolution witnessed, among other major events, the Storming of the Bastille in July and the passage of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen in August.
 liberal assemblies conservative monarchy republic was conflict and Robespierre and Directory assumed Consulate under Napoleon.
 French soldiers feudal system, seigneurial dues, Jewish ghettos, equality under Civil Code, served as "an object of emulation all over the globe,"  but it also perpetuated further discrimination against women under the banner of the "natural order". 

===Aftermath of the French Revolution===
  black state in the Americas.]]

Liberals in the 19th century wanted to develop a world free from government intervention, or at least free from too much government intervention. They championed the ideal of negative liberty, which constitutes the absence of coercion and the absence of external constraints.  They believed governments were cumbersome burdens and they wanted governments to stay out of the lives of individuals.  Liberals simultaneously pushed for the expansion of civil rights and for the expansion of free markets and free trade. The latter kind of economic thinking had been formalized by Adam Smith in his influential Wealth of Nations (1776), which revolutionized the field of economics and argued that the "invisible hand" of the free market was a self-regulating mechanism that did not depend on external interference.  Sheltered by liberalism, the laissez-faire economic world of the 19th century emerged with full tenacity, particularly in the United States and in the United Kingdom. 
  in the laissez-faire liberal economy of the Industrial Revolution era provoked strong criticism by figures such as the writer and social critic Charles Dickens and political and economic theorist Karl Marx.]]
 1812 Constitution defeating the July Revolution of 1830, orchestrated by liberal politicians and journalists, removed the Bourbon monarchy and inspired similar uprisings elsewhere in Europe.

 n revolutionaries during the Revolutions of 1848.]] revolutions in second republic Metternich shocked Europe when he resigned and fled to Britain in panic and disguise. 
 easily defeated triumphing against third republic after their loss in the war, and the rest of French history transpired under republican eyes.
 War of Radical Liberals who toppled the conservatives were led by Eloy Alfaro, a firebrand who implemented a variety of sociopolitical reforms, including the separation of church and state, the legalization of divorce, and the establishment of public schools. 
 Liberal Party, Radical and Whig elements. Conservative domination, general election of 1906, aided by working class voters worried about food prices. After that historic victory, the Liberal Party shifted from its classical liberalism and laid the groundwork for the future British welfare state, establishing various forms of health insurance, unemployment insurance, and pensions for elderly workers.  This new kind of liberalism would sweep over much of the world in the 20th century.

===Conflict and renewal===
 
 , President of the United States (1913-1921). Wilsons Fourteen Points became the foundation for both the principle of self-determination and inspired the founding of the League of Nations and its successor the United Nations.]]
  in 1935 carrying papers saying: "The Frenchwoman Must Vote". Womens suffrage was not granted in France until 1944.]]
  in his famous speech during the March on Washington where he declared that African Americans deserved the civil rights legally accorded to them by the Constitution of the United States and the Emancipation Proclamation that had been denied to them.]] dynastic states. losses to widespread riots Tsar Nicholas Romanov rule Provisional Government Petrograd workers, communist group second revolution in Russia during the same year. The communist victory presented a major challenge to capitalism as a core component of liberalism. As some manifestations of communism historically resulted in totalitarian regimes, mainstream liberalism has shied away from association with communism. However, the economic problems that rocked the Western world in the 1930s proved even more devastating, leading to fundamental reforms in some of the aims of the liberal state.
 modern liberalism Classical liberals, such as economist Ludwig von Mises, posited that completely free markets were the optimal economic units capable of effectively allocating resources—that over time, in other words, they would produce full employment and economic security.  Keynes spearheaded a broad assault on classical economics and its followers, arguing that totally free markets were not ideal, and that hard economic times required intervention and investment from the state. Where the market failed to properly allocate resources, for example, the government was required to stimulate the economy until private funds could start flowing again—a "prime the pump" kind of strategy designed to boost industrial production. 
 President Roosevelt unemployment rate gross national Democrats precipitated gross domestic public debt stood at a staggering 120 percent of GNP, but unemployment had been effectively eliminated.  Most nations that emerged from the Great Depression did so with deficit spending and strong intervention from the state.
  in 1989 that resulted in its fall, the end of single-party state rule in East Germany, and the reunification of Germany in the form of a liberal democracy.]] Neoliberal economic policies pursued by international institutions since the 1970s and 1980s have provoked strong criticism and protest, especially in developing or underdeveloped countries that have been pressured by institutions such as the International Monetary Fund to privatize parts of their economy and remove protectionist measures, in order to gain IMF assistance.]] elite rule patriarchal society, Allies prevailed economic crisis economic troubles resurgence in collapsed precipitously, China is also challenging Western liberalism with a combination of authoritarian government and capitalism. 

==Philosophy== modern phenomenon Roman Emperor equal rights Sophists and in the Funeral Oration by Pericles. Young, pp. 25–6.  Liberal philosophy symbolizes an extensive intellectual tradition that has examined and popularized some of the most important and controversial principles of the modern world. Its immense scholarly and academic output has been characterized as containing "richness and diversity," but that diversity often has meant that liberalism comes in different formulations and presents a challenge to anyone looking for a clear definition. Young, p. 24. 

===Major themes===
 
Though all liberal doctrines possess a common heritage, scholars frequently assume that those doctrines contain "separate and often contradictory streams of thought".  The objectives of  , supporting private property and individual rights, supporting the idea of limited constitutional government, and recognizing the importance of related values such as Pluralism (political philosophy)|pluralism, toleration, autonomy, bodily integrity and Consent of the governed|consent. 

===Classical and modern=== modern world, a testament to the wide-ranging influence of liberal principles.]]
 natural rights to that authority in return for the protection of life, liberty, and property.  These early liberals often disagreed about the most appropriate form of government, but they all shared the belief that liberty was natural and that its restriction needed strong justification.  Liberals generally believed in limited government, although several liberal philosophers decried government outright, with Thomas Paine writing that "government even in its best state is a necessary evil". Young, p. 31. 
 Baron de judicial branches.  Governments had to realize, liberals maintained, that poor and improper governance gave the people authority to overthrow the ruling order through any and all possible means, even through outright violence and revolution, if needed.  Contemporary liberals, heavily influenced by social liberalism, have continued to support limited constitutional government while also advocating for state services and provisions to ensure equal rights. Modern liberals claim that formal or official guarantees of individual rights are irrelevant when individuals lack the material means to benefit from those rights and call for a greater role for government in the administration of economic affairs. 
 from human divine will. openly hostile to religious belief itself, but most concentrated their opposition to the union of religious and political authority, arguing that faith could prosper on its own, without official sponsorship or administration by the state. 

Beyond identifying a clear role for government in modern society, liberals also have obsessed over the meaning and nature of the most important principle in liberal philosophy: liberty. From the 17th century until the 19th century, liberals—from Adam Smith to John Stuart Mill—conceptualized liberty as the absence of interference from government and from other individuals, claiming that all people should have the freedom to develop their own unique abilities and capacities without being sabotaged by others. Young, p. 33.  Mills On Liberty (1859), one of the classic texts in liberal philosophy, proclaimed that "the only freedom which deserves the name, is that of pursuing our own good in our own way".  Support for laissez-faire capitalism is often associated with this principle, with Friedrich Hayek arguing in The Road to Serfdom (1944) that reliance on free markets would preclude totalitarian control by the state.  
 liberal philosopher. official policy Liberal Party in United Kingdom|Britain, precipitating the rise of social liberalism and the modern welfare state.]]
 negative version, and it was first developed by British philosopher Thomas Hill Green. Green rejected the idea that humans were driven solely by self-interest, emphasizing instead the complex circumstances that are involved in the evolution of our moral character. Adams, pp. 54–5.  In a very profound step for the future of modern liberalism, he also tasked social and political institutions with the enhancement of individual freedom and identity.  Foreshadowing the new liberty as the freedom to act rather than to avoid suffering from the acts of others, Green wrote the following:

 
 John Hobson. Liberal Party suffrage rights, liberals increasingly understood that people left out of the democratic decision-making process were liable to the tyranny of the majority, a concept explained in Mills On Liberty and in Democracy in America (1835) by Alexis de Tocqueville. Young, p. 36.  As a response, liberals began demanding proper safeguards to thwart majorities in their attempts at suppressing the rights of minorities. 
 equal subjects Libertarian thinker Lockean equality instead.  To contribute to the development of liberty, liberals also have promoted concepts like pluralism and toleration. By pluralism, liberals refer to the proliferation of opinions and beliefs that characterize a stable social order.  Unlike many of their competitors and predecessors, liberals do not seek conformity and homogeneity in the way that people think; in fact, their efforts have been geared towards establishing a governing framework that harmonizes and minimizes conflicting views, but still allows those views to exist and flourish.  For liberal philosophy, pluralism leads easily to toleration. Since individuals will hold diverging viewpoints, liberals argue, they ought to uphold and respect the right of one another to disagree. Young, p. 44.  From the liberal perspective, toleration was initially connected to religious toleration, with Spinoza condemning "the stupidity of religious persecution and ideological wars".  Toleration also played a central role in the ideas of Kant and John Stuart Mill. Both thinkers believed that society will contain different conceptions of a good ethical life and that people should be allowed to make their own choices without interference from the state or other individuals. 

===Criticism and support=== feminist history, hopes to eradicate all barriers to gender equality—claiming that the continued existence of such barriers eviscerates the individual rights and freedoms ostensibly guaranteed by a liberal social order.  British philosopher Mary Wollstonecraft is widely regarded as the pioneer of liberal feminism, with A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) expanding the boundaries of liberalism to include women in the political structure of liberal society.  Less friendly to the goals of liberalism has been conservatism. Edmund Burke, considered by some to be the first major proponent of modern conservative thought, offered a blistering critique of the French Revolution by assailing the liberal pretensions to the power of rationality and to the natural equality of all humans. Grigsby, p. 108.  Conservatives have also attacked what they perceive to be the reckless liberal pursuit of progress and material gains, arguing that such preoccupations undermine traditional social values rooted in community and continuity.  However, a few variations of conservatism, like liberal conservativism, expound some of the same ideas and principles championed by classical liberalism, including "small government and thriving capitalism". 

Some confusion remains about the relationship between social liberalism and socialism, despite the fact that many variants of socialism distinguish themselves markedly from liberalism by opposing anti-capitalism|capitalism, hierarchy and private property. Socialism formed as a group of related yet divergent ideologies in the 19th century such as Christian socialism, Communism (with the writings of Karl Marx) and Social Anarchism (with the writings of Mikhail Bakunin), the latter two influenced by the Paris Commune. These ideologies — as with liberalism and conservatism — fractured into several major and minor movements in the following decades.  Marx rejected the foundational aspects of liberal theory, hoping to destroy both the state and the liberal distinction between society and the individual while fusing the two into a collective whole designed to overthrow the developing capitalist order of the 19th century. 
 American liberalism Catholic social ideas and has gained a large following in some European nations.  The early roots of Christian democracy developed as a reaction against the industrialization and urbanization associated with laissez-faire liberalism in the 19th century.  Despite these complex relationships, some scholars have argued that liberalism actually "rejects ideological thinking" altogether, largely because such thinking could lead to unrealistic expectations for human society. 

==Worldwide==
 
  Liberal parties, think tanks, and other institutions are common in many nations, although they advocate for different causes based on their ideological orientation. Liberal parties can be Centre-left|center-left, Centrism|centrist, or Centre-right|center-right depending on their location.
 democratic institutions. ideological spectrum.

Some parties in the LI are among the most famous in the world, such as the Liberal Party of Canada, while others are among the smallest, such as the Gibraltar Liberal Party. Regionally, liberals are organized through various institutions depending on the prevailing geopolitical context. The European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party, for example, represents the interests of liberals in Europe while the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is the predominant liberal group in the European Parliament.

===Europe===
 
  English and French versions, democratic values constitutional reform universal education, property rights. Free Democratic national liberal social liberal factions. 
 fall of Liberal Democrats Social Liberals, National Liberal Party, have been classified as Centre-right|center-right. 
 Liberal Party, Labour Party Social Democratic Party, a Labour splinter group, in 1988 to form the current Liberal Democrats, a social liberal party.
 general election local council general election Conservatives resulting in party leader Nick Clegg becoming the Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and many other members becoming ministers.
 Purple Coalition Dutch history, market liberal Labour Party—an legalized same-sex prostitution while policy on marijuana.

===Americas===
 
  of TIME Magazine, January 1933]] Liberal Party Democratic Party, ruled the Canadian history, Conservative Party New Democratic Party.  
 modern liberalism unprecedented four elections. The New Deal coalition established by Franklin Roosevelt left a decisive legacy and influenced many future American presidents, including John F. Kennedy, a self-described liberal who defined a liberal as "someone who looks ahead and not behind, someone who welcomes new ideas without rigid reactions...someone who cares about the welfare of the people". 
 conservative backlash Republican Party. civil unrest Economic woes 2008 presidential election. 
 Latin America, conservative regimes Mexico and Ecuador ushered market liberals Red Liberal de América Latina (RELIAL), a center-right network that brings together dozens of liberal parties and organizations.
 Mexican New Nueva Alianza and the Cuban Liberal Union, which aims to secure power in Cuba. Some major liberal parties in the region continue, however, to align themselves with social liberal ideas and policies—a notable case being the Colombian Liberal Party, which is a member of the Socialist International. Another famous example is the Paraguayan Authentic Radical Liberal Party, one of the most powerful parties in the country, which has also been classified as center-left. 

===Other regions=== Liberal Party four presidents since it was founded in 1945.]] In Australia, Liberal Party. liberal nationalists demanding the creation of a more liberal and autonomous India.  Liberalism continued to be the main ideological current of the group through the early years of the 20th century, but socialism gradually overshadowed the thinking of the party in the next few decades.
 Liberal Party in the Philippines, the Democratic Progressive Party in Taiwan, and the Pheu Thai Party in Thailand. Two notable examples of liberal influence can be found in India and Australia, although several Asian nations have rejected important liberal principles.

A famous struggle led by the INC eventually earned Indian independence movement|Indias independence from Britain. In recent times, the party has adopted more of a liberal streak, championing open markets while simultaneously seeking social justice. In its 2009 Manifesto, the INC praised a "secular and liberal" Indian nationalism against the nativist, communal, and conservative ideological tendencies it claims are espoused by the Right-wing politics|right.  In general, the major theme of Asian liberalism in the past few decades has been the rise of democratization as a method facilitate the rapid economic modernization of the continent.  In nations such as Myanmar, how