 
 
 
Linguistics is the   have been attributed to Pini around 500 BCE, with his analysis of Sanskrit in Ashtadhyayi. 
 morphology (the formation and composition of words), syntax (the formation and composition of phrases and sentences from these words), and phonology (sound systems). Phonetics is a related branch of linguistics concerned with the actual properties of speech sounds and nonspeech sounds, and how they are produced and perceived.
 meaning is concerned with how languages employ logical structures and real-world references to convey, process, and assign meaning, as well as to manage and resolve ambiguity.  This category includes the study of semantics (how meaning is inferred from words and concepts) and pragmatics (how meaning is inferred from context).

Linguistics also looks at the broader context in which language is influenced by social, cultural, historical and political factors. This includes the study of evolutionary linguistics, which investigates into questions related to the origins and growth of languages; historical linguistics, which explores language change; sociolinguistics, which looks at the relation between linguistic variation and social structures; psycholinguistics, which explores the representation and function of language in the mind; neurolinguistics, which looks at language processing in the brain; language acquisition, on how children or adults acquire language; and discourse analysis, which involves the structure of texts and conversations.
 Literary theorists study the use of language in literature. Linguistics additionally draws on and informs work from such diverse fields as acoustics, anthropology, biology, computer science, human anatomy, Informatics (academic field)|informatics, neuroscience, philosophy, psychology, sociology, and speech-language pathology.

==Terminology== synchronic analysis, however, this focus has shifted  and the term "philology" is now generally used for the "study of a languages grammar, history, and literary tradition", especially in the United States,  where it was never as popular as it was elsewhere (in the sense of the "science of language"). 

Although the term "linguist" in the sense of "a student of language" dates from 1641,  the term "linguistics" is first attested in 1847.    It is now the usual academic term in English for the scientific study of language.

The term linguist applies within the field to someone who studies language, or specific languages. Outside the field, this term is commonly used to refer to people who speak many languages fluently.   

==Fundamental questions==
Linguistics concerns itself with describing and explaining the nature of human language. Fundamental questions include what is universal to language, how language can vary, and how human beings come to know languages. Linguistic research can broadly be divided into the descriptive analysis of structure and grammar on the one hand and the study of non-linguistic influences on language on the other.

===Formal and functional approaches=== module in generative theory of Noam Chomsky, do not necessarily consider that language evolved for communication in particular. They consider instead that it has more to do with the process of structuring human thought (see also formal grammar). 
 cooperative activity and extend cooperative networks. Such functional theories of grammar view language as a tool that emerged and is adapted to the communicative needs of its users, and the role of cultural evolutionary processes are often emphasised over that of biological evolution.

===Variation and universality=== French and English across the globe, as well as its smaller dialects and regional permutations within their national boundaries. The theory of variation looks at the cultural stages that a particular language undergoes, and these include the following. The first stage is pidgin, or that phase in the creation of a languages variation when new, non-native speakers undertake a mainstream language and use its phrases and words in a broken manner that often attempts to be overly literal in meaning. At this junction, many of the linguistic characteristics of the native speakers own language or mother tongue influence their use of the mainstream language, and that is when it arrives at the stage of being called a Creole language|creole. Hence, this process in the creation of dialects and varieties of languages as globally popular as English and French, as well as others like Spanish, for instance, is one that is rooted in the changing evolution and growth of each language. These variating factors are studied in order to understand the different usages and dialects that a language develops over time.

===Dialects===
Dialects are linguistic variations which are based on the way a certain community of people speak. The group of people who are the speakers of a dialect are usually bound to each other by social identity. This is what differentiates a dialect from a discourse. These are speech varieties that have not been given an official status as a language. Dialects often get the status of a language due to political and social reasons. The popular saying that a "language is a dialect with an army and navy" is attributed as a definition of a language to Max Weinreich.

A discourse is a way of speaking that emerges within a certain social setting, and is based on a certain subject matter. There are certain lexical additions (new words) that are brought into play because of the expertise of the community of people within a certain domain of specialisation. People in the medical fraternity, for example, may use some medical terminology in their communication that is specialised to the field of medicine. This is often referred to as being part of the medical discourse, and so on and so forth.
 Noam Chomsky and those who follow his theory and work.

"We may as individuals be rather fond of our own dialect. This should not make us think, though, that it is actually any better than any other dialect. Dialects are not good or bad, nice or nasty, right or wrong  they are just different from one another, and it is the mark of a civilised society that it tolerates different dialects just as it tolerates different races, religions and sexes."  

==Schools of thought==
 

===Early grammarians===
 
  inscription at Thanjavur]] Sanskrit morphology sounds and phonemes (sounds as units of a linguistic system). 
 Greek to speakers of other languages. While this school was the first to use the word "grammar" in its modern sense, Plato had used the word in its original meaning as "Art of Grammar|tchn grammatik" ( ), the "art of writing," which is also the title of one of the most important works of the Alexandrine school by Dionysius Thrax.  Throughout the Middle Ages the study of language was subsumed under the topic of philology, the study of ancient languages and texts, practiced by such educators as Roger Ascham, Wolfgang Ratke and John Amos Comenius. 

===Historicism=== William Jones sparked the rise of comparative linguistics.  Bloomfield attributes "the first great scientific linguistic work of the world" to Jacob Grimm, who wrote Deutsche Grammatik.  .  It was soon followed by other authors writing similar comparative studies on other language groups of Europe. The scientific study of language was broadened from Indo-European to language in general by Wilhelm von Humboldt, of whom Bloomfield asserts:  "This study received its foundation at the hands of the Prussian statesman and scholar Wilhelm von Humboldt (17671835), especially in the first volume of his work on Kavi, the literary language of Java, entitled ber die Verschiedenheit des menschlichen Sprachbaues und ihren Einflu auf die geistige Entwickelung des Menschengeschlechts (On the Variety of the Structure of Human Language and its Influence upon the Mental Development of the Human Race)." 

===Structuralism===
  diachronic to synchronic analyses syntagm and The Prague school, Leonard Bloomfield, Charles F. Hockett, Louis Hjelmslev, mile Benveniste and Roman Jakobson.  . 

===Generativism===
  generativist school. acquire language modularist and formalist in character. Chomsky built on earlier work of Zellig Harris to formulate the generative theory of language. According to this theory the most basic form of language is a set of syntactic rules universal for all humans and underlying the grammars of all human languages. This set of rules is called Universal Grammar, and for Chomsky describing it is the primary objective of the discipline of linguistics. For this reason the grammars of individual languages are of importance to linguistics only in so far as they allow us to discern the universal underlying rules from which the observable linguistic variability is generated.

In the classic formalization of generative grammars first proposed by Noam Chomsky in the 1950s, {{Cite journal 
 | author = Chomsky, Noam
 | title = Three Models for the Description of Language
 | journal = IRE Transactions on Information Theory
 | volume = 2 
 | issue = 2
 | pages = 113&ndash;123
 | year = 1956
 | doi = 10.1109/TIT.1956.1056813
}}  {{Cite book
 | author = Chomsky, Noam
 | title = Syntactic Structures
 | publisher = Mouton
 | location = The Hague
 | year = 1957
}}  a grammar G consists of the following components:
* A finite set N of nonterminal symbols, none of which appear in strings formed from G. disjoint from N.
* A finite set P of production rules,  that map from one string of symbols to another.
A formal description of language attempts to replicate a speakers knowledge of the rules of their language, and the aim is to produce a set of rules that is minimally sufficient to successfully model valid linguistic forms.

===Functionalism===
   formal theories of grammar, in that the latter seeks to define the different elements of language and describe the way they relate to each other as systems of formal rules or operations, whereas the former defines the functions performed by language and then relates these functions to the linguistic elements that carry them out. This  means that functional theories of grammar tend to pay attention to the way language is actually used, and not just to the formal relations between linguistic elements. 

Functional theories then describe language in term of functions existing on all levels of language. 
*Phonological function: the function of the phoneme is to distinguish between different lexical material.
*Semantic function: (Agent (linguistics)|Agent, Patient (linguistics)|Patient, Recipient (linguistics)|Recipient, etc.), describing the role of participants in states of affairs or actions expressed. subject  and Object (grammar)|Object), defining different perspectives in the presentation of a linguistic expression Theme and Rheme, Topic and Focus (linguistics)|Focus, Predicate (grammar)|Predicate), defining the informational status of constituents, determined by the pragmatic context of the verbal interaction. Functional descriptions of grammar strive to explain how linguistic functions are performed in communication through the use of linguistic forms.

===Cognitive linguistics===
  emergent property frame semantics, embodied experience constitute the basic units of language.

Cognitive linguistics interprets language in terms of the concepts, sometimes universal, sometimes specific to a particular tongue,  which underlie its forms. It is thus closely associated with semantics but is distinct from psycholinguistics, which draws upon empirical findings from cognitive psychology in order to explain the mental processes that underlie the acquisition, storage, production and understanding of speech and writing. Cognitive linguistics denies that there is an autonomous linguistic faculty in the mind;  it understands grammar in terms of conceptualization; and it claims that knowledge of language arises out of language use.  Because of its conviction that knowledge of language is learned through use, cognitive linguistics is sometimes considered to be a functional approach, but it differs from other functional approaches in that it is primarily concerned with how the mind creates meaning through language, and not with the use of language as a tool of communication.

==Sub-disciplines==
===Linguistic structures=== Saussurean linguistic sign|sign.  For instance, the meaning "cat" is represented worldwide with a wide variety of different sound patterns (in oral languages), movements of the hands and face (in sign languages), and written symbols (in written languages). 

Linguists focusing on structure attempt to understand the rules regarding language use that native speakers know (not always consciously).  All linguistic structures can be broken down into component parts that are combined according to (sub)conscious rules, over multiple levels of analysis.  For instance, consider the structure of the word "tenth" on two different levels of analysis.  On the level of internal word structure (known as morphology), the word "tenth" is made up of one linguistic form indicating a number and another form indicating ordinality.  The rule governing the combination of these forms ensures that the ordinality marker "th" follows the number "ten."  On the level of sound structure (known as phonology), structural analysis shows that the "n" sound in "tenth" is made differently from the "n" sound in "ten" spoken alone.  Although most speakers of English are consciously aware of the rules governing internal structure of the word pieces of "tenth", they are less often aware of the rule governing its sound structure.  Linguists focused on structure find and analyze rules such as these, which govern how native speakers use language.

Linguistics has many sub-fields concerned with particular aspects of linguistic structure.  These sub-fields range from those focused primarily on form to those focused primarily on meaning.  They also run the gamut of level of analysis of language, from individual sounds, to words, to phrases, up to discourse.  

Sub-fields that focus on a structure-focused study of language:
* Phonetics, the study of the physical properties of speech (or signed) production and perception.
* Phonology, the study of sounds (or signs) as discrete, abstract elements in the speakers mind that distinguish meaning (phonemes).
* Morphology (linguistics)|Morphology, the study of morphemes, or the internal structures of words and how they can be modified sentences
* meanings of sentences communicative acts, and the role played by context and non-linguistic knowledge in the transmission of meaning texts (spoken, written, or signed)
* Stylistics (linguistics)|Stylistics, the study of linguistic factors (rhetoric, diction, stress) that place a discourse in context.
* Semiotics, the study of signs and sign processes (semiosis), indication, designation, likeness, analogy, metaphor, symbolism, signification, and communication.

Many linguists would agree that these divisions overlap considerably, and the independent significance of each of these areas is not universally acknowledged. Regardless of any particular linguists position, each area has core concepts that foster significant scholarly inquiry and research.

===Inter-disciplinary factors===
Alongside the structurally motivated domains of study, are other fields within the domain of linguistics.  These fields are often distinguished by external factors that influence the study of language.
* Applied linguistics, the study of language-related issues applied in everyday life, notably language policies, planning, and education. (Constructed language fits under Applied linguistics.)
* Biolinguistics, the study of natural as well as human-taught communication systems in animals, compared to human language.
* Clinical linguistics, the application of linguistic theory to the field of Speech-Language Pathology.
* Computational linguistics, the study of linguistic issues in a way that is computationally responsible, i.e., taking careful note of computational consideration of algorithmic specification and computational complexity, so that the linguistic theories devised can be shown to exhibit certain desirable computational properties implementations. the acquisition of lang