California love! 

[1]-California...knows how to party
California...knows how to party
In the citaaay of L.A.
In the citaaay of good ol' Watts
In the citaaay, the city of Compton
We keep it rockin! We keep it rockin! 

[Verse One: Dr. Dre]

Now let me welcome everybody to the wild, wild west 
A state that's untouchable like Elliot Ness
The track hits ya eardrum like a slug to ya chest 
Pack a vest for your Jimmy in the city of sex
We in that sunshine state with a bomb ass hemp beat 
the state where ya never find a dance floor empty
And pimps be on a mission for them greens 
lean mean money-makin-machines servin fiends
I been in the game for ten years makin rap tunes 
ever since honeys was wearin sassoon
Now it's '95 and they clock me and watch me 
Diamonds shinin lookin like I robbed Liberace
It's all good, from Diego to tha Bay 
Your city is tha bomb if your city makin pay
Throw up a finger if ya feel the same way 
Dre puttin it down for 
Californ-i-a
[repeat 1]

[2]-Shake it shake it baby
Shake it shake it baby
Shake it shake it mama
Shake it Cali
Shake it shake it baby
Shake it shake it shake it shake it... 

[Verse Two: 2Pac]

Out on bail fresh outta jail, California dreamin
Soon as I stepped on the scene, I'm hearin hoochies screamin
Fiendin for money and alcohol
the life of a west side playa where cowards die
Only in Cali where we riot not rally to live and die
In L.A. we wearin Chucks not Ballies (that's right)
Dressed in Locs and khaki suits and ride is what we do
Flossin but have caution we collide with other crews
Famous cause we program worldwide 
Let'em recognize from Long Beach to Rosecrands
Bumpin and grindin like a slow jam, it's west side 
So you know the row won't bow down to no man
Say what you say 
But give me that bomb beat from Dre 
Let me serenade the streets of L.A.
From Oakland to Sacktown 
The Bay Area and back down
Cali is where they put they mack down
Give me love!
[rpt 1]

[dre] now make it shake... 

[rpt 2]

[Outro: Dre, 2Pac]

uh, yeah, uh, longbeach in tha house, uh yeah
Oaktown, Oakland definately in tha house hahaha
Frisko, Frisko
[Tupac] hey, you know LA is up in this 
Pasadina, where you at
yeah, Ingelwood, Ingelwood always up to no good
[Tupac] even Hollywood tryin to get a piece baby
Sacramento, sacramento where ya at? yeah 

Throw it up y'all, throw it up, Throw it up
Let's show these fools how we do this on that west side
Cause you and I know it's tha best side 

yeah, That's riight
west coast, west coast
uh, California Love
California Love











﻿[50 Cent]
New York City!
You are now rapping...with 50 Cent
You gotta love it...
I just wanna chill and twist a la
Catch suns in my 7-45
You drive me crazy shorty I
Need to see you and feel you next to me
I provide everything you need and I
Like your smile I don't wanna see you cry
Got some questions that I got to ask and I
Hope you can come up with the answers babe

[Nate Dogg]
Girl...It's easy to love me now
Would you love me if I was down and out?
Would you still have love for me?
Girl...It's easy to love me now
Would you love me if I was down and out?
Would you still have love for me?
Girl...

[50 Cent]
If I fell off tomorrow would you still love me?
If I didn't smell so good would you still hug me?
If I got locked up and sentenced to a quarter century,
Could I count on you to be there to support me mentally?
If I went back to a hoopty from a Benz, would you poof and disappear like 
some of my friends?
If I was hit and I was hurt would you be by my side?
If it was time to put in work would you be down to ride?
I'd get out and peel a nigga cap and chill and drive
I'm asking questions to find out how you feel inside
If I ain't rap 'cause I flipped burgers at Burger King
would you be ashamed to tell your friends you feelin' me?
In the bed if I used my tongue would you like that?
If I wrote you a love letter would you write back?
Now we can have a lil' drink you know a nightcap
And we could go do what you like, I know you like that

[Nate Dogg]
Girl...It's easy to love me now
Would you love me if I was down and out?
Would you still have love for me?
Girl...It's easy to love me now (Woo!)
Would you love me if I was down and out?
Would you still have love for me?
Girl...

[50 Cent]
Now would you leave me if you're father found out I was thuggin'?
Do you believe me when I tell you, you the one I'm loving?
Are you mad 'cause I'm asking you 21 questions?
Are you my soulmate? 'Cause if so, girl you a blessing
Do you trust me enough, to tell me your dreams?
I'm staring at ya' trying to figure how you got in them jeans
If I was down would you say things to make me smile?
I treat you how you want to be treated just teach me how
If I was with some other chick and someone happened to see?
And when you asked me about it I said it wasn't me
Would you believe me? Or up and leave me?
How deep is our bond if that's all it takes for you to be gone?
We're only humans girl we make mistakes, to make it up I do whatever it take
I love you like a fat kid loves cake
You know my style I say anything to make you smile

[Nate Dogg]
Girl...It's easy to love me now
Would you love me if I was down and out?
Would you still have love for me?
Girl...It's easy to love me now
Would you love me if I was down and out?
Would you still have love for me?
Girl...

Could you love me in a Bentley?
Could you love me on a bus?
I'll ask 21 questions, and they all about us
Could you love me in a Bentley?
Could you love me on a bus?
I'll ask 21 questions, and they all about us











﻿[Intro: 50 Cent]
Yeah...
Uh huh
So seductive

[Chorus: 50 Cent & Olivia]
[50 Cent]
I'll take you to the candy shop
I'll let you lick the lollipop
Go 'head girl, don't you stop
Keep going 'til you hit the spot (woah)
[Olivia]
I'll take you to the candy shop
Boy one taste of what I got
I'll have you spending all you got
Keep going 'til you hit the spot (woah)

[Verse 1: 50 Cent]
You can have it your way, how do you want it
You gon' back that thing up or should i push up on it
Temperature rising, okay lets go to the next level
Dance floor jam packed, hot as a teakettle
I'll break it down for you now, baby it's simple
If you be a nympho, I'll be a nympho
In the hotel or in the back of the rental
On the beach or in the park, it's whatever you into
Got the magic stick, I'm the love doctor
Have your friends teasing you 'bout how sprung I gotcha
Wanna show me how you work it baby, no problem
Get on top then get to bouncing round like a low rider
I'm a seasons vet when it come to this shit
After you work up a sweat you can play with the stick
I'm trying to explain baby the best way I can
I melt in your mouth girl, not in your hands (ha ha)

[Chorus]

[Bridge: 50 Cent & Olivia]
Girl what we do (what we do)
And where we do (and where we do)
The things we do (things we do)
Are just between me and you (oh yeah)

[Verse 2: 50 Cent]
Give it to me baby, nice and slow
Climb on top, ride like you in the rodeo
You ain't never heard a sound like this before
Cause I ain't never put it down like this before
Soon as I come through the door she get to pulling on my zipper
It's like it's a race who can get undressed quicker
Isn't it ironic how erotic it is to watch em in thongs
Had me thinking 'bout that ass after I'm gone
I touch the right spot at the right time
Lights on or lights off, she like it from behind
So seductive, you should see the way she wind
Her hips in slow-mo on the floor when we grind
As Long as she ain't stopping, homie I ain't stopping
Dripping wet with sweat man its on and popping
All my champagne campaign, bottle after bottle its on
And we gon' sip 'til every bubble in every bottle is gone

[Chorus 2x]











﻿[50 Cent]
Go, go, go, go
Go, go, go shorty
It's your birthday
We gon' party like it's yo birthday
We gon' sip Bacardi like it's yo birthday
'Cause you know we don't give a fuck
It's not your birthday!

[Chorus (2x)]
You can find me in the club, bottle full of Bud
Mama, I got that X, if you into takin' drugs
I'm into having sex, I ain't into making love
So come give me a hug if you into getting rubbed

[Verse]
When I pull out up front, you see the Benz on dubs
When I roll 20 deep, it's 20 knives in the club
Niggas heard I fuck with Dre, now they wanna show me love
When you sell like Eminem, and the hoes they wanna fuck
But homie ain't nothing change ho's down, G's up
I see Xzibit in the Cutt that nigga roll that weed up
If you watch how I move you'll mistake me for a playa or pimp
Been hit wit a few shells but I dont walk wit a limp
In the hood, in L.A. they saying "50 you hot"
They like me, I want them to love me like they love 'Pac
But holla in New York them niggas'll tell ya I'm loco
And the plan is to put the rap game in a choke hold
I'm feelin' focused man, my money on my mind
I got a mill out the deal and I'm still on the grind
Now shawty said she feeling my style, she feeling my flow
Her girlfriend wanna get bi and they ready to go

[Chorus (2x)]

[Bridge]
My flow, my show brought me the dough
That bought me all my fancy things
My crib, my cars, my clothes, my jewels
Look nigga I done came up and I ain't change.

[Verse]
And you should love it, way more then you hate it
Nigga you mad? I thought that you'd be happy I made it
I'm that cat by the bar toasting to the good life
You that faggot ass nigga trying to pull me back right?
When my junk get to pumping in the club it's on
I wink my eye at ya bitch, if she smiles she gone
If the roof on fire, let the motherfucker burn
If you talking bout money homie, I ain't concerned
I'm a tell you what Banks told me cause go 'head switch the style up
If the niggas hate then let 'em hate
Watch the money pile up
Or we go upside there wit a bottle of bub
You know where we fucking be

[Chorus (2x)]

[Talking]
[Laughing] Don't try to act like you ain't know where we been either nigga
In the club all the time nigga, its about to pop off nigga
G-Unit











﻿[Intro]
Yeah
Shady
Aftermath
G-Unit

[Verse 1]
Damn baby all I need is a lil bit
A lil bit of this, a lil bit of that
Get it crackin' in the club when you hear this shit
Drop it like its hot, get to workin' that back
Go shake that thang, yeah work that thang
Let me see it go up and down
Rotate that thang, I wanna touch that thang
Can you make it go round and round
I step up in the club, I'm like who you with
G-Unit in the house, yeah thats my clique
Yeah I'm young, but a nigga from the old school
On the dance floor, a nigga doin' old moves
I don't give a fuck, I do what I wan' do
I hit your ass up, boy I done warned you
Better listen, when I talk, nigga don't trip
Yo' heat in the car, mine's in this bitch
I ain't tryna beef, I'm tryna get my drink on
Got my diamonds, my fitted, and my mink on
I'ma kick it at the bar till its time to go
Then I'ma get shorty here and I'ma let her know

[Chorus]
All a nigga really need is a lil bit
Not a lot baby girl just a lil bit
We can head to the crib in a lil bit
I can show ya how I live in a lil bit
I wanna unbutton your pants just a lil bit
Take 'em off and pull 'em down just a lil bit
Get to kissin' and touchin' a lil bit
Get to lickin' and fucking a lil bit

[Verse 2]
This is 50, comin' out your stereos
Hard to tell though, cause I switched the flow
Eyes a lil low, cause I twist the dro'
Pockets on swoll cause I move the O's
My neck, my wrist, my ears is froze
Come get ya bitch, she on me dawg
She musta heard about the dough
Now captain come on and save a hoe
I get it crunk in the club, I'm off the chain
Number one on the chart, all the time mayn
When the kid in the house, I turn it out
Keep the dance floor packed, thats without a doubt
And shorty shake that thang like a pro mayn
She back it up on me I'm like oh mayn
I get close enough to her so I know she can hear
System thumpin', party jumpin', I said loud and clear

[Chorus]
All a nigga really need is a lil bit
Not a lot baby girl just a lil bit
We can head to the crib in a lil bit
I can show ya how I live in a lil bit
I wanna unbutton your pants just a lil bit
Take 'em off and pull 'em down just a lil bit
Get to kissin' and touchin' a lil bit
Get to lickin' and -- a lil bit

[Bridge]
Baby you got me feelin' right (ya heard me)
My mama gone, you can spend the night (ya heard me)
I ain't playin', I'ma tryna fuck tonight (ya heard me)
Clothes off, face down, ass up, c'mon

[Chorus x2]
All a nigga really need is a lil bit
Not a lot baby girl just a lil bit
We can head to the crib in a lil bit
I can show ya how I live in a lil bit
I wanna unbutton your pants just a lil bit
Take 'em off and pull 'em down a lil bit
Get to kissin' and touchin' a lil bit
Get to lickin' and -- a lil bit












﻿[Intro - 50 Cent]
Yeah
Shady
Aftermath

[Chorus - 50 Cent]
I guess you didn't know
I be back for more
Everybody's on the floor
Goin', goin' outta control

[Bridge - 50 Cent]
Set it off from your left dawg
Set it off from your right dawg
Set it off nigga I said set if off

[Verse 1]
Sick with it boy, better get wit it what
In the club, I get it goin' goin' uhh
Just move it to the music its on
To the sound of 50 and D-R-E
Everythings calculated in time percised
Never move another mill let's get right aight
Success is my drug of choice I'm high off life
Feelin' lucky enough to bet it all on the dice
Shorty do what you wanna do
Hit the dance floor, move how you wanna move
Later on, we can cruise if you wanna cruise
Its whatever you want, the fact is I got more than I flaunt

[Chorus - 50 Cent]
I did my thang in the club
Every chance I get, I tear it up
Dance floor, jam-packed
I got 'em goin', goin' outta control

[Bridge - 50 Cent]
Set it off from your left dawg
Set if off from your right dawg
Set it off nigga I said set it off

[Verse 2]
System thumpin', dance floor jumpin'
We thirty deep in this bitch, we stuntin'
Thats what you get, you in my hood
I thought you understood
You know me, VIP, no ID
Bottles in DP, I do it real BIG
Bitches break their necks to be where I be
Take 'em to ecstacy without ecstacy
I'm the chef, you need a hit, I got the recipe
Doc got the antedote and send the drugs in the nose
Can you feel it, Em said for me to make ya feel it
And remind you that you rockin' with the realest

[Chorus - 50 Cent]
I did my thang in the club
Every chance I get, I tear it up
Dance floor, jam-packed
I got 'em goin', goin' outta control

[Bridge - 50 Cent]
Set it off from your left dawg
Set it off from your right dawg
Set it off nigga I said set it off

[Verse 3]
I'm hot boy, I'm burnin' up
I do my thang in the club with the burner tounge
Till the speakers all blown we gon' turn it up
And do that damn thang, yeah do that mayn
Shorty, hit me high, then hit me low
Get to poppin' and shakin' that thang on the flo'
A little dose of it, now I want some more
No body put that thang on me like that before
I be a fiend for it, its the way you move
But I ain't payin' for it, cause I ain't no fool
If you okay with it, tonight I'll stay with it
Hit the telly, play wit it, in a major way get it

[Chorus - 50 Cent]
I did my thang in the club
Every chance I get, I tear it up
Dance floor, jam-packed
I got 'em goin', goin' outta control

[Bridge - 50 Cent]
Set if off from your left dawg
Set it off from your right dawg
Set it off nigga I said set it off











﻿
[Chorus]
I don't know what you heard about me
But a bitch can't get a dollar out of me
No Cadillac, no perms, you can't see
That I'm a motherfucking P-I-M-P
[Repeat]

[Verse 1]
Now shorty, she in the club, she dancing for dollars
She got a thing for that Gucci, that Fendi, that Prada
That BCBG, Burberry, Dolce and Gabana
She feed them foolish fantasies, they pay her cause they wanna
I spit a little G man, and my game got her
A hour later, have that ass up in the Ramada
Them trick niggas in her ear saying they think about her
I got the bitch by the bar trying to get a drink up out her
She like my style, she like my smile, she like the way I talk
She from the country, think she like me cause I'm from New York
I ain't that nigga trying to holla cause I want some head
I'm that nigga trying to holla cause I want some bread
I could care less how she perform when she in the bed
Bitch hit that track, catch a date, and come and pay the kid
Look baby this is simple, you can't see
You fucking with me, you fucking with a P-I-M-P

[Chorus]

[Verse 2]
I'm bout my money you see, girl you can holla at me
If you fucking with me, I'm a P-I-M-P
Not what you see on TV, no Cadillac, no greasy
Head full of hair, bitch I'm a P-I-M-P
Come get money with me, if you curious to see
how it feels to be with a P-I-M-P
Roll in the Benz with me, you could watch TV
From the backseat of my V, I'm a P-I-M-P
Girl we could pop some champagne and we could have a ball
We could toast to the good life, girl we could have it all
We could really splurge girl, and tear up the mall
If ever you needed someone, I'm the one you should call
I'll be there to pick you up, if ever you should fall
If you got problems, I can solve'em, they big or they small
That other nigga you be with ain't bout shit
I'm your friend, your father, and confidant, BITCH

[Chorus]

[Verse 3]
I told you fools before, I stay with the tools
I keep a Benz, some rims, and some jewels
I holla at a hoe til I got a bitch confused
She got on Payless, me I got on gator shoes
I'm shopping for chinchillas, in the summer they cheaper
Man this hoe you can have her, when I'm done I ain't gon keep her
Man, bitches come and go, every nigga pimpin know
You saying it's secret, but you ain't gotta keep it on the low
Bitch choose with me, I'll have you stripping in the street
Put my other hoes down, you get your ass beat
Now Nik my bottom bitch, she always come up with my bread
The last nigga she was with put stitches in her head
Get your hoe out of pocket, I'll put a charge on a bitch
Cause I need 4 TVs and AMGs for the six
Hoe make a pimp rich, I ain't paying bitch
Catch a date, suck a dick, shiiit, TRICK

[Chorus]

Yeah, in Hollywoood they say there's no b'ness like show b'ness
In the hood they say, there's no b'ness like hoe b'ness ya know
They say I talk a lil fast, but if you listen a lil faster
I ain't got to slow down for you to catch up, BITCH












﻿It's 50 a.k.a Ferrari F-50
Break it down
I got a lot of living to do before I die
And I ain't got time to waste
Let's make it

[50 Cent]
You said you a gangster but you never pop nuttin'
We said you a wanksta and you need to stop frontin'
You ain't a friend of mine, (yeah)
You ain't no kin of mine, (nah)
What makes you think that I wont run up on you with the nine
We do this all the time, right now we on the grind
So hurry up and copy and go selling nicks and dimes
Shorty she so fine, I gotta make her mine
A ass like that gotta be one of a kind
I crush 'em everytime, punch 'em with every line
I'm fucking with they mind
I make 'em press rewind
They know they can't shine if I'm around the rhyme
Been on parole since 94 cause I commit the crime
I send you my line, I did it three to nine
If D's ran up in my crib, you know who dropping dimes

[Chorus 2X: 50 Cent]
You said you a gangsta
But you never pop nothing
We said you a wanksta
And you need to stop frontin'
You go to the dealership
But you never cop nuttin'
You been hustling a long time
And you ain't got nothing

[Verse 2]
Damn Homie, in high school you was the man, homie
What the fuck happened to you?
I got the sickest vendetta when it come to the chedda
And if you play with my paper, you gotta meet my berretta
Now shorty think I'm a sweat her, sipping on amaretto
I'm living once than deada, I know I can do better
She look good but I know she after my chedda
She tryna get in my pockets, homie and I ain't gonna let her
Be easy, stop the bullshit, you get your whole crew wet
We in the club doin' the same ol' two step
Guerrilla unit cause they say we bugged out
Cause we don't go nowhere without toast we thugged out

[Chorus 2X]

[Verse 3]
Me I'm no mobsta, me I'm no gangsta
Me I'm no hitman, me I'm just me, me
Me I'm no wanksta, me I'm no acta
But it's me you see on your TV
Cause I hustle baby, this rap shit is so easy
I'm gettin' what you get for a brick to talk greasy
By any means, partner, I got to eat on these streets
If you play me close, for sure I'm gonna pop my heat
Niggas saying they going murd' 50, how?
We riding 'round with guns the size of Lil Bow Wow
What you know about AK's and AR 15's?
Equipped with night vision, shell catchers and F-bangs, huh

[Chorus 2X]











﻿
Tonight's the night I get in some shit, (Yeah)
Deep cover on the incognito tip.
Killin' motherfuckers if I have to, 
Peelin' caps too, cause you niggas know I'm comin' at you.
I guess thats part of the game,
But I feel for the nigger who thinks he just gonna come and chance things
With the swiftness, so get it right, with the quickness,
And let me handle my business, yo.
I'm on a mission and my mission won't stop
Until I get the nigger maxin at the top.
I hope you get his ass before he drops.
Kingpin kickin back while his workers sling his rocks.
Coming up like a fat rat.
Big money, big cars, big body guards on his back.
So it's difficult to get him.
But I got the hook up with somebody who knows how to get in contact with 
him.
Hit him like this and like that, 
Let 'em know that I'll make it for a big fat dope sack
What is this pen? so let's rush it.
If you want to handle it tonight we'll discuss it 
On the nigga's time, in the nigga's place,
Take a strap just in case one of his boys recognise my face.
Cause he's a sheisty motherfucker,
But I gives a fuck, cause I'm going deep cover. 

[Chorus: Dr. Dre (Snoop Doggy Dogg)]

Yeah, and you don't stop (cause it's 1-8-7 on an undercover cop)
Yeah, and you don't stop (cause it's 1-8-7 on an undercover cop)

[Verse Two: Snoop Doggy Dogg]

Creep with me as I crawl through the hood,
Maniac, lunatic, call 'em Snoop Eastwood
Kickin dust as I bust fuck peace
And, the mothafuckin drug police
You already know I gives a fuck about a cop
So why in the fuck would you think that it would stop
Plot, yeah, that's what we's about to do
Take your ass on a mission with the boys in blue
Dre, (whatup, Snoop) yo I got the feelin
Tonight's the night like Betty Wright, and I'm chillin
Killin, feelin, no remorse, yeah
So lets go straight to the motherfuckin' source
And see what we can find
Crooked ass cops that be gettin niggaz a gang of times
And now they wanna make a deal with me
Scoop me up and put me on they team and chill with me
And make my pockets bigger
They want to meet with me tonight at 7:00, so whassup nigger?
What you wanna do? (What you wanna do?)
I got the gauge, a uzi and the mothafuckin 22
so if you wanna blast, nigga we can buck 'em
If we stick 'em then we stuck 'em so fuck 'em!" 

[Chorus: Dr. Dre (Snoop Doggy Dogg)]

Yeah, and you don't stop (cause it's 1-8-7 on an undercover cop)
Yeah, and you don't stop (cause it's 1-8-7 on an undercover cop) 

[Verse Three: Snoop Doggy Dogg]

Six fo' five was the time on the clock,
When me and my homey bailed in the parking lot.
The scene looked strange and it felt like a set up
Better not be, cause if it is, they're getting lit up.
Oh here they come from the back and they laxed.
I'm checkin for the gats they strap, so whats up black?
Chill, lets hit a deal, 
if it aint up to what you feel then grab your steel.
Right, so, what you motherfuckers gonna come at me with?
Hope you ain't wantin' none of my grip.
Cause you can save that shit. Guess what they told me?
'We give you 20 G's if you snitch on your homey,
We'll put you in a home, and make your life plush,
Oh yeah, but you got to sell dope for us."
Hmmm, let me think about it
Turned my back and grabbed my gat and guess what I told him before I shot 
it:
'If you don't quit, yeah, if you don't stop, yeah, I'm lettin' my gat pop'
Cause it's 1-8-7 on an undercover cop

[Chorus: Dr. Dre (Snoop Doggy Dogg)]

Yeah, and you don't stop (cause it's 1-8-7 on an undercover cop)
Yeah, and you don't stop (cause it's 1-8-7 on an undercover cop)











﻿Ya'll know me still the same OG
But I been low key
Hated on by most these niggas
With no cheese, no deals and no G's, no wheels and no keys
No boats, no snowmobiles and no ski's
Mad at me cause
I can finally afford to provide my family with groceries
Got a crib with a studio and it's all full of tracks
To add to the wall full of plaques
Hanging up in the office in back of my house like trophies
But ya'll think I'm gonna let my dough freeze
Ho Please
You better bow down on both knees
Who you think taught you to smoke trees
Who you think brought you the o' G's
Eazy-E's Ice Cube's and D.O.C's and Snoop D O double G's
And a group that said muthafuck the police
Gave you a tape full of dope beats
To bump when stroll through in your hood
And when your album sales wasn't doing too good
Who's the doc that they told you to go see
Ya'll better listen up closely
All you niggas that said that I turned pop
Or the Firm flopped
ya'll are the reason Dre ain't been getting no sleep
So fuck ya'll all of ya'll
If ya'll don't like me blow me
Ya'll are gonna keep fucking around with me
And turn me back to the old me

[chorus x2 - Eminem:]
Nowadays everybody wanna talk like they got something to say
But nothing comes out when they move their lips
Just a bunch of gibberish
And motherfuckers act like they forgot about Dre

[Eminem]
So what do you say to somebody you hate
Or anybody tryna bring trouble your way
Wanna resolve things in a bloodier way
Just study your tape of NWA.
One day I was walking by
With a Walkman on
When I caught a guy giving me an awkward eye
And strangled him off in the parking lot with his Karl Kani
I don't give a fuck if it's dark or not
I'm harder than me tryna park a Dodge
But I'm drunk as fuck
Right next to a humongous truck in a two car garage
Hopping out with two broken legs tryna walk it off
Fuck you too bitch call the cops
I'ma kill you and them loud ass motherfucking barking dogs
And when the cops came through
Me and Dre stood next to a burnt down house
With a can full of gas and a hand full of matches
And still weren't found out
From here on out it's the Chronic 2
Starting today and tomorrow's the new
And I'm still loco enough
To choke you to death with a Charleston chew
[Record scratch]
Slim shady hotter than a set of twin babies
In a Mercedes Benz with the windows up
And the temp goes up to the mid 80's
Calling men ladies
Sorry Doc but I been crazy
There is no way that you can save me
It's OK go with him Hailie

[chorus x2]

[Dr Dre]
If it was up to me
You motherfuckers would stop coming up to me
With your hands out looking up to me
Like you want something free
When my last CD was out you wasn't bumping me
But now that I got this little company
Everybody wanna come to me like it was some disease
But you won't get a crumb from me
Cause I'm from the streets of Compton
I told em all
All them little gangstas
Who you think helped mold 'em all
Now you wanna run around and talk about guns
Like I ain't got none
What you think I sold 'em all
Cause I stay well off
Now all I get is hate mail all day sayin' Dre fell off
What, cause I been in the lab with a pen and a pad
Tryna get this damn label off
I ain't having that
This is the millennium of Aftermath
It ain't gonna be nothing after that
So give me one more platinum plaque and fuck rap
You can have it back
So where's all the mad rappers at
It's like a jungle in this habitat
But all you savage cats
Knew that I was strapped with gats
When you were cuddling a cabbage patch

[Chorus x3]











﻿
[Hook]
Roll up, wait a minute
Let me put some kush up in it
Roll up, wait a minute
Let me put some kush up in it
Roll up, wait a minute
Let me put some kush up in it
Roll up, wait a minute
Let me put some kush up in it

[Dr Dre]
Now what's that puff puff pass shit
That Cheech and Chong grass shit
Blunts to the head, kush pillows, no mattress
Speed boat traffic, bitches automatic
Cross that line, fuck around and get yo ass kicked
We roll shit that burn slow as fucking malasis
Probably won't pass it, smoke it till the last hit
Down to the ashes, Mary J. a bad bitch
Andre 3001 another classic
Go ahead ask him bitches, bout "how I be smokin' out"
Party all night, yea its goin' down
Order rounds, we smokin' quarter pounds of that good stuff
Oh, yeah we smokin' all night
Yea puff puff pass that shit right here
Nigga, better than my last batch, caramel complexion and her ass black
Inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale,

[Akon]
I know you tryna get high
Type of shit that have ya leaning sideways
Take a whiff of this suicide
Holla at me cause I got it all day
No need to fly to Jamaica
For the ganja, we can get the same thing
You want that bom bom biggy, holla at my niggi right here in LA
Inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale

[Timbaland]
Hold up, wait a minute
Let me put some kush up in it
Hold up, wait a minute
Let me put some kush up in it

[Snoop Dogg]
Still I am
Tighter than the pants on Will.I.Am
Back throw, back still, a half pound in my backpack
Next to where the swishas at, smokin' presidential
Got some bubba, I give me that
Need it for my cataracts
Four hoes, and I'm the pimp, in my Cadillac
You can tell them Cali back
Matter fact, they all know, this ain't Dro
Get a whiff of that
No it ain't no seeds in my sack
You ain't never gotta ask dawg
What he smokin' on?
Shit kush till my mind gone
What you think I'm on
Eyes low, I'm blown
High as a motherfucker, ain't no question bout it
Niggas say smoke me out, yea I really doubt it
I'm Bob Marley reincarnated, so faded
So If you want it
You know yo nigga homie,
You can put it in a zag or a blunt and get blunted

Inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale

[Akon]
I know you tryna get high
Type of shit that have ya leaning sideways
Take a whiff of this suicide
Holla at me cause I got it all day
No need to fly to Jamaica
For the ganja, we can get the same thing
You want that bom bom biggy, holla at my niggi right here in LA
Inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale

Ain't that kush, we blow on the best smoke
Inhale slow, no joke
Make yo ass choke
Hold up wait a minute
You can go put it back
Cause what you got in yo sack boy, it ain't that
Ain't that Kush, we blow on the best smoke
Inhale slow, no joke
Make yo ass choke

(Inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale)











﻿[Snoop Doggy Dogg]
One, two, three and to the fo'
Snoop Doggy Dogg and Dr. Dre are at the do'
Ready to make an entrance, so back on up
(Cause you know we 'bout had to rip shit up)
Gimme the microphone first, so I can bust like a bubble
Compton and Long Beach together, now you know you in trouble
Ain't nothin' but a G thang, baaaaabay!
Two loc'ed out G's so we're craaaaazay!
Death Row is the label that paaaaays me!
Unfadable, so please don't try to fade this (Hell yeah)
But, uh, back to the lecture at hand
Perfection is perfected, so I'm 'a let 'em understand
From a young G's perspective
And before me dig out a bitch I have ta' find a contraceptive
You never know she could be earnin' her man,
And learnin' her man, and at the same time burnin' her man
Now you know I ain't wit that shit, Lieutenant
Ain't no pussy good enough to get burnt while I'm up in it
(yeah) Now that's realer than real-deal Holyfield
And now all you hookas and ho's know how I feel 
Well if it's good enough to get broke off a proper chunk
I'll take a small piece of some of that funky stuff 

[Hook: Snoop Doggy Dogg]

It's like this and like that and like this and uh
It's like that and like this and like that and uh
It's like this and like that and like this and uh
Dre, creep to the mic like a phantom 

[Dr. Dre]
Well I'm peepin', and I'm creepin', and I'm creep-in'
But I damn near got caught, 'cause my beeper kept beepin'
Now it's time for me to make my impression felt
So sit back, relax, and strap on your seatbelt
You never been on a ride like this befo'
With a producer who can rap and control the maestro
At the same time with the dope rhyme that I kick
You know, and I know, I flow some ol funky shit
To add to my collection, the selection
Symbolizes dope, take a toke, but don't choke
If ya' do, ya' have no clue
O' what me and my homey Snoop Dogg came to do 

[Hook: Snoop Doggy Dogg & Dr. Dre]

It's like this and like that and like this and uh
It's like that and like this and like that and uh
It's like this, and we ain't got no love for those
So jus' chill, 'til the next episode 

[Snoop Doggy Dogg]
Fallin' back on that ass with a hellified gangsta' lean
Gettin' funky on the mic like a' old batch o' collard greens
It's the capital S, oh yes, the fresh N-double O-P
D-O-double G-Y D-O-double G ya' see
Showin' much flex when it's time to wreck a mic
pimpin' ho's and clockin' a grip like my name was Dolomite
Yeah, and it don't quit
I think they in a mood for some mothafuckin' G shit
So Dre. (What up Dogg?)
We gotta give 'em what dey want (What's that, G?)
We gotta break 'em off somethin' (Hell yeah)
And it's gotta be bumpin' (City of Compton!) 

[Dr. Dre]
It's where it takes place so I'm a ask your attention
Mobbin like a mothafucka but I ain't lynchin
Droppin' the funky shit that's makin the sucka niggaz mumble
When I'm on the mic, it's like a cookie, they all crumble
Try to get close, and your ass'll get smacked
My mothafuckin homie Doggy Dogg has my back
Never let me slip, 'cause if I slip, then I'm slippin'
But if I got my Nina, then you know I'm straight trippin'
And I'm a continue to put the rap down, put the mack down
And if your bitches talk shit, I have ta' put the smack down
Yeah, and ya' don't stop
I told you I'm just like a clock when I tick and I tock
But I'm never off, always on, 'til the break dawn
C-O-M-P-T-O-N, and the city they call Long Beach
Puttin' the shit together
Like my nigga D.O.C., no one can do it better 

[Hook: Dr. Dre & Snoop Doggy Dogg]

Like this, that and this and uh
It's like that and like this and like that and uh
It's like this, and we ain't got no love for those
So jus' chill, 'til the next episode











﻿[Snoop]
Still Snoop Dogg and D-R-E (Guess who's back)
Still, still doing that shit, huh Dre?

[Dr. Dre]
Oh for sure, check me out
It's still Dre Day, A.K. nigga
Before I chrome the lot, can't keep it home a lot
'cause when I frequent the spots that I'm known to rock
You hear the bass from the trunk when I'm on the block
Ladies, they pay homage, but haters say Dre fell off
How nigga My last album was "The Chronic"
They want to know if he still got it
They say rap's changed, they want to know how I feel about it

[Snoop - singing]
If you ain't up on pace

[Dr. Dre]
Dr. Dre is the name, I'm ahead of my game
Still, puffing my leafs, still with the beats
Still not loving police (Uh huh)
Still rock my khakis with a cuff and a crease
Still got love for the streets, repping 213
Still the beat bangs, still doing my thang
Since I left, ain't too much changed, still

[Chorus:]
[Snoop Dogg]
I'm representing for the gangsters all across the world
Still hitting them corners in them low low's girl
[Dr. Dre]
Still taking my time to perfect the beat
And I still got love for the streets, it's the D-R-E [Repeat 2x]

Since the last time you heard from me I lost some friends
Well, hell, me and Snoop, we dipping again
Kept my ear to the streets, signed Eminem
He's triple platinum, doing 50 a week
Still, I stay close to the heat
And even when I was close to defeat, I rose to my feet
My life is like a soundtrack I wrote to the beat
Treat my rap like Cali weed, I smoke till I sleep
Wake up in the A.M., compose a beat
I bring the fire till you're soaking in your seat
It's not a fluke, it's been tried, I'm the troop
It's "Turn Out the Lights" from the World Class Wreckin' Cru
I'm still at it, After-mathematic
In the home of drivebys and ak-matics
Swap meets, sticky green, and bad traffic
I dip through then I get skin, D-R-E

[Chorus]

It ain't nothing but more hot shit
Another classic CD for y'all to vibe with
Whether you're cooling on a corner with your fly bitch
Laid back in the shack, play this track
I'm representing for the gangsters all across the world
(Still hitting them corners in them low low's girl)
I'll break your neck, damn near put your face in your lap
Niggas try to be the king but the ace is back

[Snoop - singing]
So if you ain't up on thangs

[Dr. Dre]
Dr. Dre be the name still running the game
Still got it wrapped like a mummy
Still ain't tripping, love to see young blacks get money
Spend time out the hood, take they moms out the hood
Hit my boys off with jobs, no more living hard
Barbeques every day, driving fancy cars
Still gonna get mine regardless

[Chorus x1.5]

[Snoop]
Right back up in ya muthfuckin ass
'95 plus four pennies
Add that shit up, D-R-E right back on top of thangs
Smoke some with your dog
No stress, no seeds, no stems, no sticks!
Some of that real sticky icky
Ooo Wee, put it in the air
For you's a fool D.R.











﻿[Snoop Dogg]
La-da-da-da-dahh
It's the motherfucking D-O-double-G (SNOOP DOGG!)
La-da-da-da-dahh
You know I'm mobbin' with the D.R.E.
(YEAH YEAH YEAH
You know who's back up in this MOTHERFUCKER!)
What what what what?
(So blaze the weed up then!)
Blaze it up, blaze it up!
(Just blaze that shit up nigga, yeah, 'sup Snoop??)

Top Dogg, bite 'em all, nigga burn the shit up
D-P-G-C my nigga turn that shit up
C-P-T, L-B-C, yeah we hookin' back up
And when they bang this in the club baby you got to get up
Thug niggas drug dealers yeah they givin' it up
Lowlife, yo' life, boy we livin' it up
Takin' chances while we dancin' in the party for sure
Slip my hoe a forty-fo' and she got in the back do'
Bitches lookin' at me strange but you know I don't care
Step up in this motherfucker just a-swangin' my hair
Bitch quit talkin', Crip walk if if you down with the set
Take a bullet with some dick and take this dope from this jet
Out of town, put it down for the Father of Rap
And if yo' ass get cracked, bitch shut yo' trap
Come back, get back, that's the part of success
If you believe in the X you'll be relievin' your stress

[Snoop] La-da-da-da-dahh
[Dre] It's the motherfuckin' D.R.E. (Dr. Dre MOTHERFUCKER!)
[Snoop] La-da-da-da-dahhh
[Dre] You know I'm mobbin' with the D-O-double-G

[Dr. Dre]
Straight off the fuckin' streets of C-P-T
King of the beats you ride to em in your Fleet (Fleetwood)
or Coupe DeVille rollin' on dubs
How you feelin' whoopty=whoop nigga whut?
Dre and Snoop chronicled out in the 'llac
with Doc in the back, sippin' on 'gnac (yeah)
Clip in the strap, dippin' through hoods (what hoods?)
Compton, Long Beach, Inglewood!
South Central out to the Westside (wessyde)
It's California Love, this California bud got a nigga gang of pub
I'm on one, I might bail up in the Century Club
with my jeans on, and my team strong
Get my drink on, and my smoke on
Then go home with, something to poke on (what's up bitch?)
Loc it's on for the two-triple-oh
Comin' real, it's the next episode...

[Nate Dogg]
Hold up, hey
for my niggas who be thinkin' we soft
We don't, play
We gonna' rock it 'til the wheels fall off
Hold up, hey
for my niggas who be actin' too bold
Take a, seat
Hope you ready for the next episode
HeyyyeyyyeEYEYyyyEYYYY....
.... smoke weed everyday!












﻿
Where's my snare?
I have no snare in my headphones - there you go
Yeah... yo, yo

Have you ever been hated or discriminated against?
I have; I've been protested and demonstrated against
Picket signs for my wicked rhymes, look at the times
Sick as the mind of the motherfucking kid that's behind
All this commotion emotions run deep as ocean's exploding
Tempers flaring from parents just blow 'em off and keep going
Not taking nothing from no one give 'em hell long as I'm breathing
Keep kicking ass in the morning and taking names in the evening
Leave 'em with a taste as sour as vinegar in they mouth
See they can trigger me, but they'll never figure me out
Look at me now; I bet ya probably sick of me now ain't you momma?
I'mma make you look so ridiculous now

I'm sorry momma!
I never meant to hurt you!
I never meant to make you cry; but tonight
I'm cleaning out my closet (one more time)
I said I'm sorry momma!
I never meant to hurt you!
I never meant to make you cry, but tonight
I'm cleaning out my closet

Ha! I got some skeletons in my closet
And I don't know if no one knows it
So before they thrown me inside my coffin and close it
I'mma expose it; I'll take you back to '73
Before I ever had a multi-platinum selling CD
I was a baby, maybe I was just a couple of months
My faggot father must have had his panties up in a bunch
Cause he split, I wonder if he even kissed me goodbye
No I don't. On second thought I just fucking wished he would die
I look at Hailie, and I couldn't picture leaving her side
Even if I hated Kim, I grit my teeth and I'd try
To make it work with her at least for Hailie's sake
I maybe made some mistakes
But I'm only human, but I'm man enough to face them today
What I did was stupid, no doubt it was dumb
But the smartest shit I did was take the bullets outta that gun
Cause I'da killed him; shit I would've shot Kim and him both
It's my life, I'd like to welcome y'all to "The Eminem Show"

I'm sorry momma!
I never meant to hurt you!
I never meant to make you cry; but tonight
I'm cleaning out my closet (one more time)
I said I'm sorry momma!
I never meant to hurt you!
I never meant to make you cry, but tonight
I'm cleaning out my closet

Now I would never diss my own momma just to get recognition
Take a second to listen for who you think this record is dissing
But put yourself in my position; just try to envision
Witnessing your momma popping prescription pills in the kitchen
Bitching that someone's always going through her purse and shit's missing
Going through public housing systems, victim of Munchhausen's Syndrome
My whole life I was made to believe I was sick when I wasn't
'Til I grew up, now I blew up, it makes you sick to ya stomach
Doesn't it? Wasn't it the reason you made that CD for me Ma?
So you could try to justify the way you treated me Ma?
But guess what? You're getting older now and it's cold when you're lonely
And Nathan's growing up so quick he's gonna know that you're phony
And Hailie's getting so big now; you should see her, she's beautiful
But you'll never see her - she won't even be at your funeral!
See what hurts me the most is you won't admit you was wrong
Bitch do your song - keep telling yourself that you was a mom!
But how dare you try to take what you didn't help me to get
You selfish bitch; I hope you fucking burn in hell for this shit
Remember when Ronnie died and you said you wished it was me?
Well guess what, I am dead - dead to you as can be!

I'm sorry momma!
I never meant to hurt you!
I never meant to make you cry; but tonight
I'm cleaning out my closet (one more time)
I said I'm sorry momma!
I never meant to hurt you!
I never meant to make you cry, but tonight
I'm cleaning out my closet

I'm sorry momma!
I never meant to hurt you!
I never meant to make you cry; but tonight
I'm cleaning out my closet (one more time)
I said I'm sorry momma!
I never meant to hurt you!
I never meant to make you cry, but tonight
I'm cleaning out my closet











﻿[Intro]
[Eminem making sounds:]
Down, down, down, down, down, down, down, down, down, down!
OK..
Guess who's back?
Back again
Shady's back
Tell a friend
Whaaaaaaaa

Now everyone report to the dance floor
To the dance floor, to the dance floor
Now everyone report to the dance floor
Alright Stop!.....Pajama time

[Verse 1]
Come here little kiddies, On my lap
Guess who's back with a brand new rap?
And I don't mean rap as in a new case of child molestation accusation
(AH-AH-AH-AH-AH)
No worries, papa's got a brand new bag of toys
What else could I possibly do to make noise?
I done touched on everything, but little boys
That's not a stab at Michael
That's just a metaphor, I'm just psycho
I go a little bit crazy sometimes
I get a little bit out of control with my rhymes
Good God, dip, do a little slide
Bend down, touch your toes and just glide
Up the center of the dance floor
Like TP for my bunghole
And it's cool if you let one go
Nobody's gonna know, who'd hear it?
Give a little "poot poot", it's OK! [Fart Sound]
Oops my CD just skipped
And everyone just heard you let one rip

[Chorus]
Now I'm gonna make you dance
It's your chance
Yeah boy shake that ass
Oops I mean girl,
Girl, girl, girl,
Girl you know you're my world
Alright now lose it
(AH-AH-AH-AH-AH)
Just lose it
(AH-AH-AH-AH-AH)
Go crazy
(AH-AH-AH-AH-AH)
Oh baby
(AH-AH)
Oh baby, baby
(AH-AH)

[Verse 2]
Well, it's Friday and it's my day
Just to party all the way to Sunday
Maybe 'til Monday, I dunno what day
Everyday's just a holiday
Crusin' on the freeway
Feelin' kinda breezy
Got the top down, lettin' my hair blow
I dunno where I'm goin'
All I know is when I get there
Someone's gonna touch my body

Excuse me miss, I don't mean to sound like a jerk
But I'm feelin' just a little stressed out from work
Could you punch me in the stomach and pull my hair?
Spit on me, maybe gouge my eyes out? (Yeah)
Now, what's your name girl?
What's your sign?
[Dr Dre] "Man, you must be up out your mind"
DRE! (AH-AH)
Beer Goggles! Blind!
I'm just tryna unwind now I'm

[Chorus]
Now I'm gonna make you dance
It's your chance
Yeah boy shake that ass
Oops I mean girl,
Girl, girl, girl,
Girl you know you're my world
Alright now lose it
(AH-AH-AH-AH-AH)
Just lose it
(AH-AH-AH-AH-AH)
Go crazy
(AH-AH-AH-AH-AH)
Oh baby
(AH-AH)
Oh baby, baby
(AH-AH)

[Verse 3]
It's Tuesday and I'm locked up
I'm in jail and I don't know what happened
They say I was running butt naked
Down the street screaming
(AH-AH-AH-AH-AH)
Well I'm sorry, I don't remember
All I know is this much
I'm not guilty
They said, "Save it, boy we gotcha you on tape
yellin' at an old lady to 'Touch my body!'"

Now this is the part where the rap breaks down
It gets real intense, no one makes a sound
Everything looks like it's 8 Mile now
The beat comes back and everybody lose themselves
Snap back to reality
Look it's B.Rabbit!
Yo you signed me up to battle!?
I'm a grown man!
Chubba chubba chubba chubba chubba chubbie
I don't have any lines to go right here so, chubba teletubbie!
Fella's (WHAT?!) Fella's (WHAT?!)
Grab you left nut, make your right one jealous (what?)
Black girls
White girls
Skinny girls
Fat girls
Tall girls
Small girls
I'm callin' all girls

Everyone report to the dance floor
It's your chance for a little romance or
Butt squeezin' it's the season
Just go (AH-AH-AH-AH)
It's so appeasin'

[Chorus]
Now I'm gonna make you dance
It's your chance
Yeah boy shake that ass
Oops I mean girl,
Girl, girl, girl,
Girl you know you're my world
Alright now lose it
(AH-AH-AH-AH-AH)
Just lose it
(AH-AH-AH-AH-AH)
Go crazy
(AH-AH-AH-AH-AH)
Oh baby
(AH-AH)
Oh baby, baby
(AH-AH)

[Outro]
UmMmMmm touch my body
UmMmMmm touch my body
Ooh boy just touch my body
I mean girl just touch my body











﻿[Eminem]
Aww look at daddy's baby girl
That's daddy baby
Little sleepy head
Yesterday I changed your diaper
Wiped you and powdered you.
How did you get so big?
Can't believe it now your two
Baby you're so precious
Daddy's so proud of you
Sit down bitch
If you move again I'll beat the shit out of you

[Eminem]
(Eminem as Kim)
(Okay)
Don't make me wake this baby
She don't need to see what I'm about to do
Quit crying bitch, why do you always make me shout at you?
How could you?
Just leave me and love him out the blue
Oh, what's a matter Kim?
Am I too loud for you?
Too bad bitch, your gonna finally hear me out this time
At first, I'm like all right
You wanna throw me out? That's fine!
But not for him to take my place, are you out you're mind?
This couch, this TV, this whole house is mine!
How could you let him sleep in our bed?
Look at Kim
Look at your husband now!
(No!)
I said look at him!
He ain't so hot now is he?
Little punk!
(Why are you doing this?)
Shut the fuck up!
(You're drunk! You're never going to get away at this!)
You think I give a fuck!
Come on we're going for a ride bitch
(No!)
Sit up front
(Well I can't just leave Hailie alone, what if she wakes up?)
We'll be right back
Well I will you'll be in the trunk

[1] - So long, bitch you did me so wrong
I don't wanna go on
Living in this world without you

[Repeat 1]

You really fucked me Kim
You really did a number on me
Never knew me cheating on you would come back to haunt me
But we was kids then Kim, I was only 18
That was years ago
I thought we wiped the slate clean
That's fucked up!
(I love you!)
Oh God my brain is racing
(I love you!)
What are you doing?
Change the station I hate this song!
Does this look like a big joke?
(No!)
There's a four year old boy lyin' dead with a slit throat
In your living room, ha-ha
What you think I'm kiddin' you?
You loved him didn't you?
(No!)
Bullshit you bitch don't fucking lie to me
What the fuck's this guy's problem on the side of me?
Fuck you asshole, yeah bite me
Kim, KIM!
Why don't you like me?
You think I'm ugly don't you
(It's not that!)
No you think I'm ugly
(Baby)
Get the fuck away from me, don't touch me
I HATE YOU! I HATE YOU!
I SWEAR TO GOD I HATE YOU
OH MY GOD I LOVE YOU
How the fuck could you do this to me?
(Sorry!)
How the fuck could you do this to me?

[Repeat 1 (2x)]

Come on get out
(I can't I'm scared)
I said get out bitch!
(Let go of my hair, please don't do this baby)
(Please I love you, look we can just take Hailie and leave)
Fuck you, you did this to us
You did it, it's your fault
Oh my God I'm crackin' up
Get a grip Marshall
Hey remember the time we went to Brian's party?
And you were like so drunk that you threw up all over Archie
That was funny wasn't it?
(Yes!)
That was funny wasn't it?
(Yes!)
See it all makes sense, doesn't it?
You and your husband have a fight
One of you tries to grab a knife
And during the struggle he accidentally gets his Adam's apple sliced
(No!)
And while this is goin' on
His son just woke up and he just walks in
She panics and he gets his throat cut
(Oh my God!)
So now they both dead and you slash your own throat
So now it's double homicide and suicide with no note
I should have known better when you started to act weird
We could've...HEY! Where you going? Get back here!
You can't run from me Kim
It's just us, nobody else!
You're only making this harder on yourself
Ha! Ha! Got'cha!
(Ahh!)
Ha! Go ahead yell!
Here I'll scream with you!
AH SOMEBODY HELP!
Don't you get it bitch, no one can hear you?
Now shut the fuck up and get what's comin to you
You were supposed to love me
{*Kim choking*}
NOW BLEED! BITCH BLEED!
BLEED! BITCH BLEED! BLEED!

[Repeat 1 (2x)]











﻿Yeah
I know sometimes things may not always make sense to you right now
But hey, what daddy always tell you?
Straighten up little soldier
Stiffen up that upper lip
What you crying about?
You got me

Hailie, I know you miss your mom and I know you miss your dad
Well I'm gone but I'm trying to give you the life that I never had
I can see you're sad, even when you smile, even when you laugh
I can see it in your eyes, deep inside you want to cry
'Cause you're scared, I ain't there?
Daddy's with you in your prayers
No more crying, wipe them tears
Daddy's here, no more nightmares
We gon' pull together through it, we gon' do it
Laney uncles crazy, ain't he?
Yeah, but he loves you girl and you better know it
We're all we got in this world
When it spins, when it swirls
When it whirls, when it twirls
Two little beautiful girls
Lookin' puzzled, in a daze
I know it's confusing you
Daddy's always on the move, mamma's always on the news
I try to keep you sheltered from it but somehow it seems
The harder that I try to do that, the more it backfires on me
All the things growing up his daddy that he had to see
Daddy don't want you to see but you see just as much as he did
We did not plan it to be this way, your mother and me
But things have gotten so bad between us
I don't see us ever being together ever again
Like we used to be when we were teenagers
But then of course everything always happens for a reason
I guess it was never meant to be
But it's just something we have no control over and that's what destiny is
But no more worries, rest your head and go to sleep
Maybe one day we'll wake up and this will all just be a dream

[Chorus:]
Now hush little baby, don't you cry
Everything's gonna be alright
Stiffen that upper lip up little lady, I told ya
Daddy's here to hold ya through the night
I know mommy's not here right now and we don't know why
We fear how we feel inside
It may seem a little crazy, pretty baby
But I promise momma's gon' be alright

It's funny
I remember back one year when daddy had no money
Mommy wrapped the Christmas presents up
And stuck 'em under the tree and said some of 'em were from me
'Cause daddy couldn't buy 'em
I'll never forget that Christmas I sat up the whole night crying
'Cause daddy felt like a bum, see daddy had a job
But his job was to keep the food on the table for you and mom
And at the time every house that we lived in
Either kept getting broken into and robbed
Or shot up on the block and your mom was saving money for you in a jar
Tryna start a piggy bank for you so you could go to college
Almost had a thousand dollars 'til someone broke in and stole it
And I know it hurt so bad it broke your momma's heart
And it seemed like everything was just startin' to fall apart
Mom and dad was arguin' a lot so momma moved back
On the Chalmers in the flat one bedroom apartment
And dad moved back to the other side of 8 Mile on Novara
And that's when daddy went to California with his CD and met Dr. Dre
And flew you and momma out to see me
But daddy had to work, you and momma had to leave me
Then you started seeing daddy on the T.V. and momma didn't like it
And you and Laney were too young to understand it
Papa was a rollin' stone, momma developed a habit
And it all happened too fast for either one of us to grab it
I'm just sorry you were there and had to witness it first hand
'Cause all I ever wanted to do was just make you proud
Now I'm sitting in this empty house, just reminiscing
Lookin' at your baby pictures, it just trips me out
To see how much you both have grown, it's almost like you're sisters now
Wow, guess you pretty much are and daddy's still here
Laney I'm talkin' to you too, daddy's still here
I like the sound of that, yeah
It's got a ring to it don't it?
Shh, momma's only gone for the moment

[Chorus]

And if you ask me too
Daddy's gonna buy you a mockingbird
I'mma give you the world
I'mma buy a diamond ring for you
I'mma sing for you
I'll do anything for you to see you smile
And if that mockingbird don't sing and that ring don't shine
I'mma break that birdie's neck
I'll go back to the jeweler who sold it to ya
And make him eat every carat don't fuck with dad (ha ha)












﻿[Chorus: x2]
Hi! My name is... (what?) My name is... (who?)
My name is... [scratches] Slim Shady
Hi! My name is... (huh?) My name is... (what?)
My name is... [scratches] Slim Shady

Ahem... excuse me!
Can I have the attention of the class for one second?

[Eminem:]
Hi kids! Do you like violence? (Yeah yeah yeah!)
Wanna see me stick Nine Inch Nails through each one of my eyelids? (Uh-huh!)
Wanna copy me and do exactly like I did? (Yeah yeah!)
Try 'cid and get fucked up worse that my life is? (Huh?)
My brain's dead weight, I'm trying to get my head straight
But I can't figure out which Spice Girl I want to impregnate (Ummmm...)
And Dr. Dre said, "Slim Shady you a basehead!"
Uh-uhhh! "So why's your face red? Man you wasted!"
Well since age twelve, I've felt like I'm someone else
Cause I hung my original self from the top bunk with a belt
Got pissed off and ripped Pamela Lee's tits off
And smacked her so hard I knocked her clothes backwards like Kris Kross
I smoke a fat pound of grass and fall on my ass
Faster than a fat bitch who sat down too fast
C'mere slut! (Shady, wait a minute, that's my girl dog!)
I don't give a fuck, God sent me to piss the world off!

[Chorus]

[Eminem:]
My English teacher wanted to flunk me in Junior High
Thanks a lot, next semester I'll be thirty-five
I smacked him in his face with an eraser, chased him with a stapler
And stapled his nuts to a stack of papers (Owwwwwwww!)
Walked in the strip club, had my jacket zipped up
Flashed the bartender, then stuck my dick in her tip cup
Extraterrestrial runnin' over pedestrians
In a space ship while they screaming at me: "LET'S JUST BE FRIENDS!"
Ninety-nine percent of my life I was lied to
I just found out my mom does more dope than I do (Damn!)
I told her I'd grow up to be a famous rapper
Make a record about doing drugs and name it after her (Oh thank you!)
You know you blew up when the women rush your stands
And try to touch your hands like some screaming Usher fans (Aaahhhhhh!)
This guy at White Castle asked for my autograph
(Dude, can I get your autograph?)
So I signed it: 'Dear Dave, thanks for the support, ASSHOLE!'

[Chorus]

[Eminem:]
Stop the tape! This kid needs to be locked away! (Get him!)
Dr. Dre, don't just stand there, OPERATE!
I'm not ready to leave, it's too scary to die (Fuck that!)
I'll have to be carried inside the cemetery and buried alive (Huh yup!)
Am I coming or going? I can barely decide
I just drank a fifth of vodka - dare me to drive? (Go ahead)
All my life I was very deprived
I ain't had a woman in years, and my palms are too hairy to hide (Whoops!)
Clothes ripped like the Incredible Hulk (hachhh-too)
I spit when I talk, I'll fuck anything that walks (C'mere)
When I was little I used to get so hungry I would throw fits
How you gonna breast feed me mom? (Wah!)
You ain't got no tits! (Wahhh!)
I lay awake and strap myself in the bed
With a bulletproof vest on and shoot myself in the head (BANG!)
I'm steaming mad (Arrrggghhh!)
And by the way when you see my dad? (Yeah?)
Tell him that I slit his throat, in this dream I had












﻿Love.
Don't hurt me.
Don't hurt me
No more.
Young Money...
No more.
Love.

[Verse 1 ‒ Lil Wayne]
Throw dirt on me and grow a wildflower
But it's "fuck the world", get a child out her
Yeah, my life a bitch, but you know nothing about her
Been to hell and back, I can show you vouchers
I'm rolling Sweets, I'm smoking sour
Married to the game but she broke her vows
That's why my bars are full of broken bottles
And my night stands are full of open Bibles
I think about more than I forget
But I don't go around fire expecting not to sweat
And these niggas know I lay them down, make them beg
Bitches try to kick me while I'm down: I'll break your leg
Money outweighing problems on a triple beam
I'm sticking to the script, you niggas skipping scenes
Be good or be good at it
Fucking right I've got my gun, semi-Cartermatic
Yeah, put a dick in their mouth, so I guess it's "fuck what they say"
I'm high as a bitch: up, up and away
Man, I'll come down in a couple of days
OK, you want me up in a cage, then I'll come out in beast mode
I got this world stuck in the safe, combination is the cheat code
It's Weezy motherfucker, blood gang and I'm in bleed mode
All about my dough but I don't even check the peephole
So you can keep knocking but won't knock me down
No love lost, no love found

[Hook ‒ Eminem & Lil Wayne]
It's a little too late to say that you're sorry now
You kicked me when I was down
But what you say just (don't hurt me)
That's right bitch (don't hurt me)
And I don't need you (no more)
Don't want to see you (no more)
Ha, bitch you get (no love)
You showed me nothing but hate
You ran me into the ground
But what comes around goes around (yeah, yeah)
I don't need you (don't hurt me)
That's right (you don't hurt me)
And I don't need you (no more)
Don't want to see you,
Ha, bitch you get (no love, no, no love, no, no love, no, no love)
Ha, bitch you get (no love, no, no love, no, no love)
And I don't need you (no more)
Get em

[Verse 2 ‒ Eminem]
I'm alive again
More alive than I have been in my whole entire life
I can see these people's ears perk up as I begin
To spaz with the pen, I'm a little bit sicker than most
Shit's gonna get thick again
They say the competition is stiff
But I get a hard dick from this shit, now stick it in
I ain't never giving in again
Caution to the wind, complete freedom
Look at these rappers, how I treat them
So why the fuck would I join 'em when I beat 'em
They call me a freak 'cause
I like to spit on these pussies 'fore I eat them
Man get these whack cocksuckers off stage
Where the fuck is Kanye when you need him?
Snatch the mic from him, bitch I'mma let you finish in a minute
Yeah that rap was tight
But I'm 'bout to spit the greatest verse of all time
So you might wanna go back to the lab tonight and um
Scribble out them rhymes you were gonna spit
And start over from scratch and write new ones
But I'm afraid that it ain't gonna make no difference
When I rip this stage and tear it in half tonight
It's an adrenaline rush to feel the bass thump
In the place all the way to the parking lot, fellow
Set fire to the mic and ignite the crowd
You can see the sparks from hot metal
Cold-hearted from the day I Bogarted the game
I so started to rock fellow
When I'm not even in my harshest
You can still get roasted 'cause Marsh is not mellow
Til I'm toppling from the top I'm not going to stop
I'm standing on my Monopoly board
That means I'm on top of my game and it don't stop
Til my hip don't hop anymore (shit)
When you're so good that you can't say it
'Cause it ain't even cool for you to sound cocky anymore (shit)
People just get sick cause you spit
These fools can't drool or dribble a drop anymore
And you can never break my stride
You never slow the momentum at any moment I'm about to blow
You'll never take my pride
Killing the flow, slow venom and the opponent
Is getting no mercy, mark my words
Ain't letting up, relentless
I smell blood, I don't give a fuck: keep giving them hell
Where was you when I fell and needed help up?
You get no love

[Hook ‒ Eminem & Lil Wayne]
It's a little too late to say that you're sorry now
You kicked me when I was down
But what you say just (don't hurt me)
That's right bitch (don't hurt me)
And I don't need you (no more)
Don't want to see you (no more)
Ha, bitch you get (no love)
You showed me nothing but hate
You ran me into the ground
But what comes around goes around (around)
I don't need you (don't hurt me)
That's right (you don't hurt me)
And I don't need you (no more)
Don't want to see you,
Ha, bitch you get (no love, no, no love, no, no love, no, no love)
Ha, bitch you get (no love, no, no love, no, no love)
And I don't need you (no more)
Get em











﻿[Eminem]
May I have your attention please?
May I have your attention please?
Will the real Slim Shady please stand up?
I repeat, will the real Slim Shady please stand up?
We're gonna have a problem here..

Y'all act like you never seen a white person before
Jaws all on the floor like Pam, like Tommy just burst in the door
and started whoopin her ass worse than before
they first were divorce, throwin her over furniture (Ahh!)
It's the return of the... "Ah, wait, no way, you're kidding,
he didn't just say what I think he did, did he?"
And Dr. Dre said... nothing you idiots!
Dr. Dre's dead, he's locked in my basement! (Ha-ha!)
Feminist women love Eminem
[*vocal turntable: chigga chigga chigga*]
"Slim Shady, I'm sick of him
Look at him, walkin around grabbin his you-know-what
Flippin the you-know-who," "Yeah, but he's so cute though!"
Yeah, I probably got a couple of screws up in my head loose
But no worse, than what's goin on in your parents' bedrooms
Sometimes, I wanna get on TV and just let loose, but can't
but it's cool for Tom Green to hump a dead moose
"My bum is on your lips, my bum is on your lips"
And if I'm lucky, you might just give it a little kiss
And that's the message that we deliver to little kids
And expect them not to know what a woman's clitoris is
Of course they gonna know what intercourse is
By the time they hit fourth grade
They got the Discovery Channel don't they?
"We ain't nothing but mammals.." Well, some of us cannibals
who cut other people open like cantaloupes [SLURP]
But if we can hump dead animals and antelopes
then there's no reason that a man and another man can't elope
[*EWWW!*] But if you feel like I feel, I got the antidote
Women wave your pantyhose, sing the chorus and it goes

[Chorus: Eminem (repeat 2X)]

'Cause I'm Slim Shady, yes I'm the real Shady
All you other Slim Shadys are just imitating
So won't the real Slim Shady please stand up,
please stand up, please stand up?

[Eminem]
Will Smith don't gotta cuss in his raps to sell his records;
well I do, so fuck him and fuck you too!
You think I give a damn about a Grammy?
Half of you critics can't even stomach me, let alone stand me
"But Slim, what if you win, wouldn't it be weird?"
Why? So you guys could just lie to get me here?
So you can, sit me here next to Britney Spears?
Shit, Christina Aguilera better switch me chairs
so I can sit next to Carson Daly and Fred Durst
and hear 'em argue over who she gave head to first
You little bitch, put me on blast on MTV
"Yeah, he's cute, but I think he's married to Kim, hee-hee!"
I should download her audio on MP3
and show the whole world how you gave Eminem VD [AHHH!]
I'm sick of you little girl and boy groups, all you do is annoy me
so I have been sent here to destroy you [bzzzt]
And there's a million of us just like me
who cuss like me; who just don't give a fuck like me
who dress like me; walk, talk and act like me
and just might be the next best thing but not quite me!

[Chorus]

[Eminem]
I'm like a head trip to listen to, cause I'm only givin you
things you joke about with your friends inside your living room
The only difference is I got the balls to say it
in front of y'all and I don't gotta be false or sugarcoated at all
I just get on the mic and spit it
and whether you like to admit it [*ERR*] I just shit it
better than ninety percent of you rappers out can
Then you wonder how can kids eat up these albums like valiums
It's funny; cause at the rate I'm goin when I'm thirty
I'll be the only person in the nursin home flirting
Pinchin nurses asses when I'm jackin off with Jergens
And I'm jerkin but this whole bag of Viagra isn't working
And every single person is a Slim Shady lurkin
He could be workin at Burger King, spittin on your onion rings
[*HACH*] Or in the parkin lot, circling
Screaming "I don't give a fuck!"
with his windows down and his system up
So, will the real Shady please stand up?
And put one of those fingers on each hand up?
And be proud to be outta your mind and outta control
and one more time, loud as you can, how does it go?

[Chorus 4X]

[Eminem]
Ha ha
Guess there's a Slim Shady in all of us
Fuck it, let's all stand up











﻿[Verse 1]
These ideas are nightmares to white parents
Whose worst fear is a child with dyed hair and who likes earrings
Like whatever they say has no bearing, it's so scary in a house that allows
no swearing
To see him walking around with his headphones blaring
Alone in his own zone, cold and he don't care
He's a problem child
And what bothers him all comes out, when he talks about
His fuckin' dad walkin' out
Cause he just hates him so bad that he blocks him out
If he ever saw him again he'd probably knock him out
His thoughts are whacked, he's mad so he's talkin' back
Talkin' black, brainwashed from rock and rap
He sags his pants, do-rags and a stocking cap
His step-father hit him, so he socked him back, and broke his nose
His house is a broken home, there's no control, he just let's his emotions
go...

[Chorus]
{C'mon}, sing with me, {sing}, sing for the years
{Sing it}, sing for the laughter, sing for the tears, {c'mon)
Sing it with me, just for today, maybe tomorrow the good Lord will take you
away...

[Verse 2]
Entertainment is changin', intertwinin' with gangsta's
In the land of the killers, a sinner's mind is a sanctum
Holy or unholy, only have one homie
Only this gun, lonely cause don't anyone know me
Yet everybody just feels like they can relate, I guess words are a
mothafucka they can be great
Or they can degrade, or even worse they can teach hate
It's like these kids hang on every single statement we make
Like they worship us, plus all the stores ship us platinum
Now how the fuck did this metamorphosis happen
From standin' on corners and porches just rappin'
To havin' a fortune, no more kissin' ass
But then these critics crucify you, journalists try to burn you
Fans turn on you, attorneys all want a turn at you
To get they hands on every dime you have, they want you to lose your mind
every time you mad
So they can try to make you out to look like a loose cannon
Any dispute won't hesitate to produce handguns
That's why these prosecutors wanna convict me, strictly just to get me off
of these streets quickly
But all they kids be listenin' to me religiously, so i'm signin' cd's while
police fingerprint me
They're for the judge's daughter but his grudge is against me
If i'm such a fuckin' menace, this shit doesn't make sense Pete
It's all political, if my music is literal, and i'm a criminal how the fuck
can I raise a little girl
I couldn't, I wouldn't be fit to, you're full of shit too, Guerrera, that
was a fist that hit you...

[CHORUS]

[Verse 3]
They say music can alter moods and talk to you
Well can it load a gun up for you , and cock it too
Well if it can, then the next time you assault a dude
Just tell the judge it was my fault and i'll get sued
See what these kids do is hear about us totin' pistols
And they want to get one cause they think the shit's cool
Not knowin' we really just protectin' ourselves, we entertainers
Of course the shit's affectin' our sales, you ignoramus
But music is reflection of self, we just explain it, and then we get our
checks in the mail
It's fucked up ain't it
How we can come from practically nothing to being able to have any fuckin'
thing that we wanted
That's why we sing for these kids, who don't have a thing
Except for a dream, and a fuckin' rap magazine
Who post pin-up pictures on their walls all day long
Idolize they favorite rappers and know all they songs
Or for anyone who's ever been through shit in their lives
Till they sit and they cry at night wishin' they'd die
Till they throw on a rap record and they sit, and they vibe
We're nothin' to you but we're the fuckin' shit in they eyes
That's why we seize the moment try to freeze it and own it, squeeze it and
hold it
Cause we consider these minutes golden
And maybe they'll admit it when we're gone
Just let our spirits live on, through our lyrics that you hear in our
songs and we can...












﻿I'm a soldier, i'm a soldier, i'm a soldier, i'm a soldier...

Yo', never was a thug, just infatuated with guns, 
never was a gangsta, 'til I graduated to one,
and got the rep of a villain, for weapon concealin', 
took the image of a thug, kept shit appealin', 
willin' to stick out my neck, for respect if it meant life or death, 
never live to regret what I said, 
when you're me, people just want to see, 
if it's true, if it's you, what you say in your rap's, what you do, 
so they feel, as part of your obligation to fulfill, 
when they see you on the streets, face to face, are you for real, 
in confrontation ain't no conversation, if you feel you're in violation, 
any hesitation'll get you killed, if you feel it, kill it, 
if you conceal it, reveal it, being reasonable will leave you full of bullets, 
pull it, squeeze it, till it's empty, tempt me, push me, pussies, 
I need a good reason to give this trigger a good squeeze...

[Chorus:]
I'm a soldier, these shoulder's hold up so much, they won't budge, 
i'll never fall or fold up,
i'm a soldier, 
even if my collar bone's crush or crumble, 
I will never slip or stumble, 
i'm a soldier, 
these shoulder's hold up so much, they won't budge, 
i'll never fall or fold up, 
i'm a soldier, 
even if my collar bone's crush or crumble, 
I will never stumble...

I love pissin' you off, it get's me off, 
like my lawyer's, when the fuckin' judge let's me off,
all you motherfuckers gotta do is set me off, 
i'll violate and all the motherfuckin' bet's be off, 
i'm a lit fuse, anything I do bitche, it's news, 
pistol whippin' motherfuckin' bouncers, six-two, 
who needs bullets, soon as I pull it, you sweat bullets, 
an excellent method to get rid of the next bully, 
it's actually better cause instead you murderin', 
you can hurt em' and come back again and kick dirt at 'em, 
it's like pourin' salt in the wounds, assault and get sued, 
you can smell the lawsuits soon as I waltz in the room, 
everybody halts and stops, calls the cops,
all you see is bitches comin' out their halter tops, 
runnin' and duckin' out the Hard Rocks parking lot, 
you'll all get shot whether its your fault or not, cause...

[Chorus]

I spit it slow so these kids know that i'm talkin' to 'em, 
give it back to these damn critics and sock it to em, 
i'm like a thug, with a little bit of Pac influence, 
I spew it, and look how I got you bitches rockin' to it, 
you motherfuckers could never do it like I could do it, 
don't even try it, you'll look stupid, do not pursue it, 
don't ever in your life, try to knock the truest, 
I spit the illest shit, ever been dropped to two inch, 
so ticky-tock listen as the sound ticks on the clock, 
listen to the sound of Kim as she licks on a cock, 
listen to the sound of me spillin' my heart through this pen, 
motherfuckers know that i'll never be Marshall again, 
full of controversy until I retire my jersey, 
'til the fire inside dies and expires at thirty, and
Lord have mercy on any more of these rappers that verse me, 
and put a curse on authorities in the face of adversity, i'm a...

[Chorus]

Yo' left, yo' left, yo' left, 
right, left, 
yo' left, yo' left, yo' left, 
right, left, 
yo' left, yo' left, yo' left, 
right, left, 
yo' left, yo' left, yo' left, 
right, left...











﻿[Chorus: Dido]
My tea's gone cold I'm wondering why I..
got out of bed at all
The morning rain clouds up my window..
and I can't see at all
And even if I could it'll all be gray,
but your picture on my wall
It reminds me, that it's not so bad,
it's not so bad..

[1st Chorus: volume gradually grows over raindrop background]
[2nd Chorus: full volume with beat right after "thunder" noise]

[Eminem as 'Stan']
Dear Slim, I wrote but you still ain't callin
I left my cell, my pager, and my home phone at the bottom
I sent two letters back in autumn, you must not-a got 'em
There probably was a problem at the post office or somethin
Sometimes I scribble addresses too sloppy when I jot 'em
but anyways; fuck it, what's been up? Man how's your daughter?
My girlfriend's pregnant too, I'm bout to be a father
If I have a daughter, guess what I'ma call her?
I'ma name her Bonnie
I read about your Uncle Ronnie too I'm sorry
I had a friend kill himself over some bitch who didn't want him
I know you probably hear this everyday, but I'm your biggest fan
I even got the underground shit that you did with Skam
I got a room full of your posters and your pictures man
I like the shit you did with Rawkus too, that shit was fat
Anyways, I hope you get this man, hit me back,
just to chat, truly yours, your biggest fan
This is Stan

[Chorus: Dido]

[Eminem as 'Stan']
Dear Slim, you still ain't called or wrote, I hope you have a chance
I ain't mad - I just think it's FUCKED UP you don't answer fans
If you didn't wanna talk to me outside your concert
you didn't have to, but you coulda signed an autograph for Matthew
That's my little brother man, he's only six years old
We waited in the blistering cold for you,
four hours and you just said, "No."
That's pretty shitty man - you're like his fuckin idol
He wants to be just like you man, he likes you more than I do
I ain't that mad though, I just don't like bein lied to
Remember when we met in Denver - you said if I'd write you
you would write back - see I'm just like you in a way
I never knew my father neither;
he used to always cheat on my mom and beat her
I can relate to what you're saying in your songs
so when I have a shitty day, I drift away and put 'em on
cause I don't really got shit else so that shit helps when I'm depressed
I even got a tattoo of your name across the chest
Sometimes I even cut myself to see how much it bleeds
It's like adrenaline, the pain is such a sudden rush for me
See everything you say is real, and I respect you cause you tell it
My girlfriend's jealous cause I talk about you 24/7
But she don't know you like I know you Slim, no one does
She don't know what it was like for people like us growin up
You gotta call me man, I'll be the biggest fan you'll ever lose
Sincerely yours, Stan -- P.S.
We should be together too

[Chorus: Dido]

[Eminem as 'Stan']
Dear Mister-I'm-Too-Good-To-Call-Or-Write-My-Fans,
this'll be the last package I ever send your ass
It's been six months and still no word - I don't deserve it?
I know you got my last two letters;
I wrote the addresses on 'em perfect
So this is my cassette I'm sending you, I hope you hear it
I'm in the car right now, I'm doing 90 on the freeway
Hey Slim, I drank a fifth of vodka, you dare me to drive?
You know the song by Phil Collins, "In the Air of the Night"
about that guy who coulda saved that other guy from drowning
but didn't, then Phil saw it all, then at a a show he found him?
That's kinda how this is, you coulda rescued me from drowning
Now it's too late - I'm on a 1000 downers now, I'm drowsy
and all I wanted was a lousy letter or a call
I hope you know I ripped +ALL+ of your pictures off the wall
I love you Slim, we coulda been together, think about it
You ruined it now, I hope you can't sleep and you dream about it
And when you dream I hope you can't sleep and you SCREAM about it
I hope your conscience EATS AT YOU and you can't BREATHE without me
See Slim; [*screaming*] Shut up bitch! I'm tryin to talk!
Hey Slim, that's my girlfriend screamin in the trunk
but I didn't slit her throat, I just tied her up, see I ain't like you
cause if she suffocates she'll suffer more, and then she'll die too
Well, gotta go, I'm almost at the bridge now
Oh shit, I forgot, how'm I supposed to send this shit out?
[car tires squeal] [CRASH]
.. [brief silence] .. [LOUD splash]

[Chorus: Dido]

[Eminem]
Dear Stan, I meant to write you sooner but I just been busy
You said your girlfriend's pregnant now, how far along is she?
Look, I'm really flattered you would call your daughter that
and here's an autograph for your brother,
I wrote it on the Starter cap
I'm sorry I didn't see you at the show, I musta missed you
Don't think I did that shit intentionally just to diss you
But what's this shit you said about you like to cut your wrists too?
I say that shit just clownin dogg,
c'mon - how fucked up is you?
You got some issues Stan, I think you need some counseling
to help your ass from bouncing off the walls when you get down some
And what's this shit about us meant to be together?
That type of shit'll make me not want us to meet each other
I really think you and your girlfriend need each other
or maybe you just need to treat her better
I hope you get to read this letter, I just hope it reaches you in time
before you hurt yourself, I think that you'll be doin just fine
if you relax a little, I'm glad I inspire you but Stan
why are you so mad? Try to understand, that I do want you as a fan
I just don't want you to do some crazy shit
I seen this one shit on the news a couple weeks ago that made me sick
Some dude was drunk and drove his car over a bridge
and had his girlfriend in the trunk, and she was pregnant with his kid
and in the car they found a tape, but they didn't say who it was to
Come to think about, his name was.. it was you
Damn!











﻿[Girls voice is Dina Rea]

[Intro]
Oh
You high baby?
Yeah
Ya
Talk to me
You want me to tell you something?
Uh-huh
I know what you want to hear...

[Chorus A]
'Cause I know you want me baby, I think I want you too
"I think I love you baby," I think I love you too
I'm here to save you girl, come be in Shady's world
I want to grow together, let's let our love unfurl
You know you want me baby, you know I want you too
They call me Superman, I'm here to rescue you
I want to save you girl, come be in Shady's world
"Ooh boy you drive me crazy," bitch you make me hurl...

[Verse 1]
They call me Superman, leap tall hoes in a single bound
I'm single now, got no ring on this finger now
I'd never let another chick bring me down in a relationship
Save it bitch, babysit, you make me sick
Superman ain't savin' shit, girl you can jump on Shady's dick
Straight from the hip, cut to the chase,
I tell a motherfuckin' slut to her face
Play no games, say no names, ever since I broke up with what's her face
I'm a different man, kiss my ass, kiss my lips, bitch why ask?
Kiss my dick, get my cash, I'd rather have you whip my ass
Don't put out, I'll put you out, won't get out, I'll push you out
Puss blew out, poppin' shit, wouldn't piss on fire to put you out
Am I too nice? Buy you ice, bitch if you died, I wouldn't buy you life
What you tryin' to be? My new wife? What you Mariah, fly through twice...

[Pre-chorus:]
But I do know one thing though, bitches, they come they go
Saturday through Sunday, Monday, Monday through Sunday yo
Maybe I'll love you one day, maybe we'll someday grow
'Til then just sit your drunk ass on that fuckin' runway ho...

[Chorus B]
'Cause I can't be your Superman
Can't be your Superman
Can't be your Superman
Can't be your Superman
I can't be your Superman
Can't be your Superman
Can't be your Superman
Your Superman, your Superman...

[Verse 2]
Don't get me wrong, I love these ho's
It's no secret, everybody knows
Yeah we fucked, bitch so what?
That's about as far as your body goes
We'll be friends, I'll call you again, I'll chase you around every bar you attend
Never know what kind of car I'll be in, we'll see how much you'll be partying then
You don't want that, neither do I,
I don't want to flip when I see you with guys
Too much pride, between you and I
Not a jealous man, but females lie
But I guess that's just what sluts do, how could it ever be just us two
I'd never love you enough to trust you, we just met and I just fucked you...

[Pre-chorus]

[Chorus A + Chorus B simultaneously]

[Verse 3]
First thing you say, "I'm not fazed, I hang around big stars all day
I don't see what the big deal is anyways
You're just plain old Marshall to me"
Ooh ya' girl run that game
"Hailie Jade, I love that name, love that tattoo, what's that say?"
"Rot in pieces, uh, that's great"
First off you don't know Marshall, at all so don't grow partial
That's ammo for my arsenal, I'll slap you off that bar stool
There goes another lawsuit, leave hand prints all across you
Good Lordy whoadie, you must be gone off that water bottle
You want what you can't have, ooh girl that's too damn bad
Don't touch what you can't grab, end up with two backhands
Put anthrax on a Tampax, and slap you 'til you can't stand
Girl you just blew your chance, don't mean to ruin your plans...

[Pre-chorus]

[Chorus A + Chorus B simultaneously]

[Chorus B 2x]











﻿
[Intro:]
'Cause sometimes you just feel tired,
Feel weak, and when you feel weak, you feel like you wanna just give up.
But you gotta search within you, you gotta find that inner strength
And just pull that shit out of you and get that motivation to not give up
And not be a quitter, no matter how bad you wanna just fall flat on your face and collapse.

[B/W Intro:]
Go left, go left, go left right left
Go left, go left, go left right left
Go left, go left, go left right left
Go left, go left, go left right left

[Verse #1:]
Till I collapse I’m spilling these raps long as you feel 'em
Till the day that I drop you'll never say that I'm not killing them
'Cause when I am not then I'ma stop penning 'em
And I am not hip-hop and I’m just not Eminem.
Subliminal thoughts when I'm stop sending them women are caught in webs spin and hauk venom
Adrenaline shots of penicillin could not get the illing to stop.
Amoxacilin is just not real enough.
The criminal cop killing hip-hop filling a minimal swap to cop millions of Pac listeners.
You're coming with me, feel it or not you’re gonna fear it like I showed you the spirit of god lives in us.
You hear it a lot, lyrics that shock is it a miracle or am I just a product of pop fizzing up.
For sizzle my whizzle this is the plot listen up you bizzles forgot slizzle does not give a fuck.

[Chorus - NateDogg]
Till the roof comes off, till the lights go out
Till my legs give out, can’t shut my mouth.
Till the smoke clears out - am I high? Perhaps.
I'ma rip this shit till my bone collapse.
Till the roof comes off, till the lights go out
Till my legs give out, can’t shut my mouth.
Till the smoke clears out - am I high? Perhaps.
I'ma rip this shit till my bone collapse.

[Verse #2:]
Music is like magic there’s a certain feeling you get when you're real
And you spit and people are feeling your shit.
This is your moment and every single minute you spend trying to hold onto it
'cause you may never get it again.
So while you’re in it try to get as much shit as you can
And when your run is over just admit when it's at its end.
'Cause I'm at the end of my wits with half this shit that gets in.
I got a list here's the order of my list that it's in.
It goes, Red G, Jay-Z, Tupac and Biggie, Andre from OutKast, Jada, Kurupt, Nas and then me.
But in this industry I'm the cause of a lot of envy, so when I’m not put on this list the shit does not offend me.
That's why you see me walk around like nothing's bothering me.
Even though half you people got a fucking problem with me.
You hate it but you know respect you’ve got to give me
The press's wet dream like Bobby and Whitney. Nate hit me.

[Chorus - NateDogg]

[Verse #3:]
Soon as a verse starts I eat it at MC’s heart
What is he thinking? How not to go against me? Smart.
And it's absurd how people hang on every word.
I’ll probably never get the props I feel I ever deserve
But I’ll never be served my spot is forever reserved
If I ever leave earth that would be the death of me first.
'Cause in my heart of hearts I know nothing could ever be worse.
That’s why I’m clever when I put together every verse
My thoughts are sporadic, I act like I’m an addict
I rap like I’m addicted to smack like I’m Kim Mathers.
But I don’t want to go forth and back in constant battles
The fact is I would rather sit back and bomb some rappers.
So this is like a full blown attack I’m launching at them
The track is on some battling raps who want some static
'Cause I don’t really think that the fact that I’m Slim matters
A plaque of platinum status is whack if I'm not the baddest.

[Chorus - NateDogg]

[Outro:]
[Eminem & Natedogg Echo:]
Until the roof
The roof comes off
Until my legs
Give out from underneath me

[Eminem:]
I will not fall,
I will stand tall,
Feels like no one can beat me.











﻿[Intro (Obie Trice)]
"Obie Trice/Real Name No Gimmicks"

[2x]
two trailer park girls go 'round the outside, 'round the outside, 'round the outside

Guess who's back, back again
Shady's back, tell a friend
Guess who's back,
guess who's back,
guess who's back,
guess who's back
guess who's back
Guess who's back...

[Verse 1]
I've created a monster, 'cause nobody wants to
see Marshall no more they want Shady I'm chopped liver
well if you want Shady, this is what I'll give ya
a little bit of weed mixed with some hard liquor
some vodka that'll jumpstart my heart quicker than a
shock when I get shocked at the hospital by the doctor when I'm not cooperating
when I'm rocking the table while he's operating (hey!)
you waited this long now stop debating 'cause I'm back,
I'm on the rag and ovulating
I know that you got a job Ms. Cheney but your husband's heart problem's complicating
So the FCC won't let me be or let me be me so let me see
they tried to shut me down on MTV but it feels so empty without me
So come on dip, bum on your lips fuck that,
cum on your lips and some on your tits and get ready 'cause this shit's about to get heavy
I just settled all my lawsuits Fuck
YOU DEBBIE!

[Chorus 2x:]
Now this looks like a job for me so everybody just follow me
'Cause we need a little controversy,
'Cause it feels so empty without me

[Verse 2]
Little hellions kids feeling rebellious
embarrassed, their parents still listen to Elvis
they start feeling like prisoners, helpless,
'til someone comes along on a mission and yells "bitch"
A visionary, vision is scary, could start a revolution, polluting the air waves a rebel
so just let me revel and bask, in the fact that I got everyone kissing my ass
and it's a disaster such a catastrophe for you to see so damn much of my ass you ask for me?
Well I'm back [batman sound]
fix your bent antennae tune it in and then I'm gonna
enter in and up under your skin like a splinter
The center of attention back for the winter
I'm interesting, the best thing since wrestling
Infesting in your kids ears and nesting
Testing "Attention Please" feel the tension soon as someone mentions me
here's my 10 cents my 2 cents is free
A nuisance, who sent, you sent for me?

[Chorus 2x]

[Verse 3]
A tisk-it a task-it, I'll go tit for tat with anybody who's talking this shit, that shit.
Chris Kirkpatrick you can get your ass kicked
worse than them little Limp Bizkit bastards, and Moby
you can get stomped by Obie, you 36 year old bald headed fag blow me
You don't know me, you're too old let go its over, nobody listens to techno
Now let's go, just give me the signal I'll be there with a whole list full of new insults
I've been dope, suspenseful with a pencil ever since
Prince turned himself into a symbol
But sometimes the shit just seems, everybody only wants to discuss me
So this must mean I'm disgusting, but its just me I'm just obscene
Though I'm not the first king of controversy
I am the worst thing since Elvis Presley, to do Black Music so selfishly
and use it to get myself wealthy (Hey)
there's a concept that works
20 million other white rappers emerge
but no matter how many fish in the sea it'd be so empty without me

[Chorus 2x]

(Hum dei dei la la Hum dei dei la la... la la la) [2x]
"Kids"











﻿(Like the fire needs the air)
(I won't burn unless your there)

Yea, I need you, I need you to hate
So I can use you for your energy
You know, it's real shit, feel this!

[Verse 1]
America's got a thing for this gangsta's shit, they love me
Black Chucks, black skullies, leather Pelle-Pelle
I take spit over raymo shit, I'm a vandal
Got that silver duck tape on my Trey Eight handle
The women on my life bring confusion shit
So like Nino from New Jack, I'll have to cancel that bitch
Look at me, this is the life I chose
Niggas around me so cold, man my heart dun froze up
I build an empire on the low the narc's don't know
I'm the weatherman, I take that coco leaf and make that snow
Sit back, watch it turn to dope, watch it go out the door
O after O, you know, homey I'm just triple beam, dreaming
Niggas be scheming, I'm fiendin to live a good life
The fiends just fiendin
Conceal my weapon nice and easy so you can't see
The penitentiary is definitely out the question for me

[Chorus]
I want the finer things in my life
So I hustle (hustle)
Nigga you get in my way when while I'm trying to get mine
And I'll buck you (buck you)
I don't care who you run with, or where you from
Nigga fuck you (fuck you)
I want to find the thing thats in my life
So I hustle (hustle)

[Verse 2]
Yea, I don't know shit about gymnastics I summersault bricks
Black talents start flying, when a nigga flip
I cook crack in the microwave, niggas can't fuck with me
Man my cold days, they called me chef boy are 50
Check my logic, smokers don't like seeds in their weed shit
Send me them seeds I'll grow 'em what they need
Them ain't chia pet plants in the crib thats chronic
And I'm selling them 500 a pop god damn it
I sold everything I'ma hustler, I know how to grind
Step on grapes put in water and tell you its wine
If you analyze me, what you'll find is the DNA of a crook

What goes in my mind, it's contagious
Hypnotic, it sounds melodic
If the rap was the block or spider, I'll be that potent product
Now get a load of me, flashy, far from low key
And you can locate me where ever that dope be, getting money man

[Chorus]

[Verse 3]
Its a hustler's ambition, close your eyes listen, see my vision
Mossberg pumping, shotgun dumping and drama means nothing
It's part of the game, catch me in the coupe switching lanes
In the jewels with your chains
I upgrade from 30 BS to clean VS
Rocks that I copped procedes from the spot
I got the energy to win, I'm full of adrenaline
Played it perf and get nauseous, watching the spinner spin
I make plans to make it, a prisoner of the state
Now I can invite yo ass out to my estate
Them hollow tips bent me up, but I'm back in shape
Pour Crystal in the blender and make a protein shake
I'm like the East coast number one playboy B
Hugh Hefner'll tell you he don't got shit on me
The feds watch me, icey they can't stop me
Racist, pointing at me look at the nigga ratchi
Hello!

[Chorus]












﻿
Yeah! Word is bond!
Das EFX in this yaknowhatI'msayin
Straight from the sewer, word is bond!
Yeah! Yah! Ah-yeah! We doin this with my nigga
Where my nigga? Ice Cube in the motherfucker
Word is bond! (Yeah!)

[Verse One: Ice Cube]

You better check yo self before you wreck yo self
Cos I'm bad for your health, I come real stealth
Droppin bombs on ya moms, fuck car alarms
Doin foul crime, I'm that nigga wit'cha Alpine
Sold it for a six-o, always let tricks know
And friends know, we got the indo
No I'm not a sucker, sittin in a House of Pain
And no I'm not the butler, I'll cut ya (Uh!)
Headbutt ya, you say you can't touch this
And I wouldn't touch ya, punk motherfucka
Here to let you know boy, oh boy
I make dough but don't call me DoughBoy
This ain't no fuckin motion picture
A guy or bitch-a, my nigga get wit'cha
And hit ya, takin that yack to the neck
So you better run a check

[Chorus One: Das EFX and Ice Cube]

[Das] So come on and chickity-check yo self before you wreck yo self
Chickity-check yo self before you wreck yo self
Yeah, come on and check yo self before you wreck yo self
[Ice] Cause shotgun bullets are bad for your health

[Hook: Das EFX]

Mic-mic-microphone check (One, two! Check it!)
[repeat 2X]

[Verse Two: Ice Cube]

Tricks wanna step to Cube and then they get played
Cause they bitchmade pullin out a switchblade
That's kinda trifle, caise that's a knife-o
AK-47, assault rifle
Hold the fifty, I'm nifty, pow
I gotta new style, "WATCH OUT NOW!"
I hate motherfuckers claimin that they foldin bank
But steady talkin shit in the holding tank
First you wanna step to me
Now your ass screamin for the deputy
They send you to Charlie-Baker-Denver row
Now they runnin up in ya slow
You're gone, used to be the Don Juan (Check that shit out!)
Now your name is just Twan
Switch it, snap it, rollin your eyes and neck
You better run a check

[Chorus Two: Das EFX and Ice Cube]

[Das] So chickity-check yo self before you wreck yo self
Come on and check yo self before you wrickity-wreck yo self
So chickity-check yo self before you wreck yo self
[Ice] Cause big dicks up yo ass is bad for yo health

[Hook]

[Verse Three: Ice Cube]

If you're foul, you better run a make on that license plate
You coulda had a V8
Instead of a tre-eight slug to the cranium (POOOOOW!)
I got six and I'm aimin em
Will I shoot or keep you guessin
Cause fuck you and that shit ya stressin
Bitch, get off the wood, you're no good
There goes the neighbourhood hooker (Slut!)
Go ahead and keep your drawers
Givin up the claps and who needs applause
At a time like this, pop the coochie and ya dead
The bitch is a Miami Hurricane hit
Sprung, niggaz call her 'Lips and Lungs'
Nappy dugout, get the fuck out
Cause women like you gets no respect
Bitch, you better run a check

[Chorus Three: Das EFX and Ice Cube]

[Das] So chickity-check yo self before you wreck yo self
So chickity-check yo self before you wreck yo self
Come on and check yo self before you wrickity-wreck yo self
[Ice] Cause bitches like you is bad for my health

[Hook]

[Chorus Three]

[Hook 3X]











﻿"Do Ya Thang"

[Chorus]
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at!
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at!

[Verse 1]
I'm in that Hot Thang, gutter lane
Dippin' with that wood grain
So fuckin' hood, mayne
They call me The Boogeyman
In that slow lane, what is your whole name?
I forgot this ho's name, I'll call her Louise Lane
Up on that boulevard, 24's rotate 
Ice Cube comin' through, gotta make the hoes wait
Roll at my own pace - nigga, don't hate!
Fuck all you fat-fuckers leanin' up against my paint!
Ice Cube, I steal a little paint (Movie star!)
Fuck you! Pour a nigga a lil' drink!
That's how it's goin' down out here in California
Listen to my people, when a nigga hit the corner!

[Chorus]
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at!
Mirror, mirror, on the wall
Who is the flyest one of all?

[Verse 2]
Now pull in the parking lot
Nigga, find a parking spot
Fired up, everyone want to spark a lot
Puff-puff-pass, we out on Ave.
Lookin' for a big fat ass to harass!
Is it you? Uh-huh, I see you lookin'
When we roll by, pussy still cookin'
Freaks get tooken when they lookin' for stars 
If you don't like my face - bitch, look at my car!
Keep it simple, I told you once befo'
It really don't matter how I get you to the mo'
It really don't matter how I get you in my low
Just hop in, let's go
And let your friends know!

[Chorus]
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at!
Mirror, mirror, on the wall
Who is the flyest one of all?

[Verse 3]
Do ya thang, girl!
Fuck what they lookin' at!
We the dogs gettin' chased by the pussycat
West Coast, baby - with so much gravy
You should call The Navy, ever since the 80's
I've been doin' good, they been doin' bad
When I see you walk by, I'm pursuin' that
But never chase it, my game is so basic
As soon as I lace it - baby, wanna taste it?
Just face it, put me to the test
Ice Cube would ace it, I'm built for success
Fuck a Rockstar! We wanna party like a Rap Star
In the club, in the house, or the backyard (Yay-yay!)
You make it rain with ones, I make it rain with hun's
And we get lap-dance from nuns 
They put away they crucifix
And they say, "Ice Cube - boy, you the shit!"

[Chorus]
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at!
Mirror, mirror, on the wall
Who is the flyest one of all?
Mirror, mirror, on the wall
Who is the flyest one of all?

[Bridge]
I see you lookin' at me
We don't give a fuck!
What you lookin' at?
We gonna give it up!

[Chorus]
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Mirror, mirror, on the wall
Who is the flyest one of all?
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at! 
Do ya thang, mayne
Fuck what they lookin' at!











﻿[Verse One:]
You know it ain't no stoppin all tha doggs I'm droppin
It's Friday night so everythang is poppin.
I got skin lets spin on da hand,
So let tha games begin.
Yakity yak don't jump back or its on,
Callin up Earl on tha car phone.
Mack 10 just got out of court,
Rollin through tha hood in his super sport ropin Too $hort.
Eighteens got tha rearview mirrors vibratin,
And deep dish daytons.
You know how we do it,
Ain't nuttin to it but tha floss,
Overcrowdin Harrison walks.
'Cuz if ya fuck wit ours,
We leave scars,
Out of G ride cars,
Livin like stars.
Might hit tha highway,
On tha Vegas run fool 'cuz its Friday.

[Chorus:]
Oh yeah, throw ya neighborhood in tha air,
If ya don't care. [x2]

[Verse Two:]
Standin outside on a Friday livin on tha edge,
'cuz we all got 'dem hard heads.
It's seems like we all are waitin,
For a drive by playin tag wit satan.
But we chillin yeah we ready and willin,
Ya hear about tha latest westside killin.
Forty sippin,
Set trippin,
Fo' dippin,
Get tha grip in,
Neva slippin.
BG's tryin tah hang out,
But OG said take ya little ass in tha house.
My big homey just got out,
Used tah be down now he's just crack ad.
He's bout hard as Darth Vada
In his sweat shirt, khakis and Chuck Taylors.
Just see him in the drive way,
Gettin beat like a smoka fool 'cuz it's Friday.

[Chorus]

[Verse Three:]
Why must I be like dat and chase da cat,
Or settle for a hoodrat.
Dookie braids no dreadlocks,
Flyin in and out of jail have a chicken and a cock.
And I love her 'cuz she down,
Tah fuck around wit tha underground pussyhound.
And her ass is big round and wide,
Jacked up makin nigga down tah ride.
Smokin indo,
Playin dat Super Nintendo,
Hear a rat tat tat on my window.
Gave her ass dat pelvic thrust,
Don't trust tha rubber 'cuz its bound tah bust.
In tha oven in tha nappy,
I had on two so I was happy.
'Cuz dat HIV'll make ya dick hang sideways,
And dat ain't cool fool 'cuz its Friday.

[Chorus]

Throw tha west side in da air,
Throw tha east side in da air,
Throw tha south side in da air,
Throw tha north side in da air.
Oh yeah!











﻿"Gangsta Rap Made Me Do It"

[Female Insert]
Maestro!!!

[Ice Cube]
Blame me

[Intro: Ice Cube]
You niggas know my pyroclastic flow
You niggas know my pyroclastic flow flow
You niggas know my pyroclastic flow it's R-A-W, R-A-W

[Ice Cube]
You looking at the grand wizard, war lord vocal chord so vicious
And I don't have to show riches to pull up pull off with some bad bitches
And it ain't about chivalry
It's about dope lyrics and delivery
It's about my persona ain't nothing like a man that can do what he wanna
Ain't nothing like man on that you knew on the corner
See 'em come up and fuck up the owner
See 'em throw up Westside California
Nigga I'm hot as Phoenix Arizona
I'm Utah I got multiple bitches
It's a new law keep a hold of yo riches
Dumb nigga don't spend it as soon as you get it
And recognize I'm a captain and you a lieutenant

[Chorus 1]
I can say what I want to say ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it
If I call you a nigga ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it
I can act like an animal ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it
If I eat you like a cannibal ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it

[Ice Cube]
I'm raw as a dirty needle
Choke an eagle
Just to feed all my people
Lyrically I'm so lethal
Plant thoughts in they mind just to defeat you
Ice Cube is a saga y'all spit saliva
And I spit lava
I got the fearless flow
Don't get near this ho
If you sacred to go
I keep it gangsta and why should change that
fuck you all you motherfuckers trying to change rap
But aren't you the same cat that sat back when they brought cocaine back
I'm trying to get me a Maybach
how you motherfuckers gonna tell me don't say that
you the ones that we learned it from
I heard nigga back in 1971

[Chorus 2]
So if I act like a pimp ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it
If I call you a nappy headed ho ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it
If I shoot up your college ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it
If I rob you of knowledge ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it

[Ice Cube]
Thank God when I bless the mic
You finally get to hear the shit that you like
A nigga talking bout real life so you can try to get this shit right
Use your brain not your back use your brain not a gat
It's a party not a jack (for real)
Don't be scared of them people
Walk up in there and show them that you equal (fuck them fuck them)
Don't be material a nigga grew up on milk and cereal
I never for got vaness and imperial
Look at my life Ice Cube is a miracle
It could be you if you was this lyrical
It could be her if she was this spiritual
Cause me and Allah go back like cronies
I don't got to be fake cause he is my homie

[Chorus 3]
If I sell a little crack ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it
If I die in Iraq ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it
If I take you for granted ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it
If I fuck up the planet ain't nothing to it gangsta rap made me do it

[Intro]

[Ice Cube]
Oh yeah and another thing
For all ya niggas that don't do gangsta rap
Don't get on TV talking about gangsta rap
Cause 9 times at a 10 you don't know the fuck you talk about
Talk about that bullshit rap you do
Stay the fuck out of mine











﻿Nigga you need to stop snitchin!
All that yip-yappin and jaw-jackin
Nigga if you scared, go to church
You knew the job was dangerous when you took it

Whattup it's the big boss Dogg
Snoop D-O-double-G, Eastside L.B.C.
And I'm bobbin to the beat of my O.G. homeboy Ice Cube
And I'm C-walkin on the motherfuckin concrete

[Intro: Ice Cube]
Yo if you're fucked up, put your cups up
Ice Cube and Snoop Dogg, nigga what's up
See he's a gangster, I'm a hustler
Yo it's either thank ya, or it's fuck ya

[Ice Cube + (Lil Jon)]
I'm down with Lil Jon ain't got to pretend (YEAH!)
"Crunk Juice" nigga run the club that you in (HEY!)
You scary motherfuckers don't wanna bring the ruckus (NAH!)
You just spend all your time in the club tryin to duck us (WHAT?)
And if you walk by nigga, I'ma knock fire nigga
from yo' ass, you can come try nigga (HEY!)
In the hood, all the way down South (YEAH!)
I ain't Mike Jones, keep my name out'cha mouth bitch (Mike Jones)
We can get it crackin if it get to clickin clackin
Look at Mr. Jackson, nigga with no reaction
If you scared, go to church, we gon' hit you where it hurts
That don't work, we'll put you in the dirt
Cause a whole lot of rappers make a whole lot of noise (hey)
Lyrics full of steroids, niggaz paranoid (hey)
And when you get that blowup, it make you throw up
When you realize your favorite rapper ain't got no nuts

[Chorus 2X: Ice Cube + (Lil Jon)]
If you a scared motherfucker go to church (GO TO CHURCH)
If you a gutter motherfucker do your dirt (A DO YOUR DIRT)
If you a down motherfucker put in work (A PUT IN WORK)
IF you a crazy motherfucker go berzerk (A GO BERZERK!)

[Snoop Dogg]
Click clackin, pistol-packin, Crip raggin folio
Who the only nigga in the club with the toolio
You ain't know? Yeah you did; there it was, there it is
"Is that Coolio?" Naw bitch, let me in
Jibba-jabba snatcher get at ya, spit at actors & rappers
Hang out with kidnappers and jackers
Make money off crackers; can you imagine how I keep shit crackin?
It's the big boss Dogg I'm back in action and smashin
I flash with the bling I sur-pass the supreme
You don't really wanna have a clash with my team
I mix hash with the green I'm the, last of the kings
If I got a bitch with me she got ass in them jeans
Rollin through yo' neighborhood, my Cadillac so clean
Servin all you suckers cause you all dopefiends
Just like that dopeman, nigga what's up?
You run up with that bullshit I'll fuck yo' ass up

[Chorus]

[Lil Jon: repeat 2X]
You scared, you scared
You scared motherfucker you scared
You scared (you scared) you scared (you scared)
You scared motherfucker you scared (you scared)

[Chorus]

[Ice Cube + (Lil Jon)]
It goes one for the money (HEY) two for the show (YEAH)
Three for the pussy, fo' for the glow (HEY)
Five for the rookies, six for the pros (NAH)
Seven for the numbers of them fuckin zeroes (WHAT?)
Eight for haters, nine for the cause
Ten for my niggaz, behind big bars (HEY)
Fuck these devils, and they laws (YEAH!)
Never question the size of Ice Cube's balls












﻿[Ice Cube]
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes {Hello..}

[Dr. Dre]
I started this gangsta shit
And this the motherfuckin thanks I get? {Hello..}

[MC Ren]
I started this gangsta shit
And this the motherfuckin thanks I get? {Hello..}

[Ice Cube]
The motherfuckin world is a ghetto
Full of magazines, full clips, and heavy metal
When the smoke settle..
.. I'm just lookin for a big yellow;
in six inch stilletos
Dr. Dre {Hello..} perculatin keep em waitin
While you sittin here hatin, yo' bitch is hyperventilatin'
Hopin that we penetratin, you gets natin
cause I never been to Satan, for hardcore administratin
Gangbang affiliatin; MC Ren'll have you 
wildin off a zone and a whole half a gallon
{Get to dialin..} 9 1 1 emergency
{And you can tell em..} It's my son he's hurtin me
{And he's a felon..} On parole for robbery
Ain't no coppin a plea, ain't no stoppin a G
I'm in the 6 you got to hop in the 3, company monopoly
You handle shit sloppily I drop a ki properly
They call me the Don Dada
Pop a collar, drop a dollar if you hear me you can holla
Even rottweilers, follow, the Impala
Wanna talk about this concrete? Nigga I'm a scholar
The incredible, hetero-sexual, credible
Beg a hoe, let it go, dick ain't edible
Nigga ain't federal, I plan shit
while you hand picked motherfuckers givin up transcripts

Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes {Hello..}

I started this gangsta shit
And this the motherfuckin thanks I get? {Hello..}

[Dr. Dre]
I started this gangsta shit
And this the motherfuckin thanks I get?

[MC Ren]
Villain blows up yo' spot
Take yo' notebook yo' bitch and yo' glock
This motherfucker thought the coochie had a padlock
You slapped her ass that's alarmin
cause she want my Worm like Carmen
We chin check niggaz, them thin check niggaz
run trains on golddiggers beware these fo' niggaz
Scarin motherfuckers like Steven King flicks
Makin niggaz clear the room like a dyke flea a dick
Makin 2nd II None shit, nigga like Quik
So when I bomb first nigga who you rollin with?
Fuck that ice on your wrist, fuck yo' fine ass bitch
Cause you could lose it in a tussle nigga watch me hustle
Watch niggaz kiss my ass without flexin a muscle
Bitches - all in the back they knees waitin to buckle
Same time same channel don't change the dial
Niggaz4Life, fuckin your wife, these niggaz wild {Hello..}

I started this gangsta shit
And this the motherfuckin thanks I get? {Hello..}

[Ice Cube]
I started this gangsta shit
And this the muh'fuckin thanks I get? {Hello..}

[Dr. Dre]
Did I fall off? Got you in your room 
rippin every "Chronic" poster on your wall off
Just cause I put away the sawed off
Now I got you sittin back with a smirk;
listenin with your arms crossed
Questionin Dre's credibility {What?}
Wondering if it's still in me to produce hits;
Y'all be killin me
As if I need to make mo' - I got a mansion 
and six cars that are paid fo' - suck my dick! {Hello..}
We came a long way from not givin a fuck
Sellin tapes out of a trunk to movin this far up
Now we got the whole world starstruck
Made a million plus and still don't give a motherfuck
Motherfucker I'm Dre - I don't need your respect
I don't need to make another album bitch I don't gotta do shit
I do it because I want to not to stay in the game
Fuck the fame, I'm still stayin the same, lil' bitch! {Hello..}

I started this gangsta shit
And this the motherfuckin thanks I get? {Hello..}

[MC Ren]
I started this gangsta shit
And this the motherfuckin thanks I get? {Hello..}

[Ice Cube]
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes {Hello..}

Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes
Look at these Niggaz With Attitudes..











﻿[Ice Cube]
Break 'em off somethin
[inhales] Shit..
[exhales] Yo..
Yo.. uhh..

[Verse One]
Just wakin up in the mornin gotta thank God
I don't know but today seems kinda odd
No barkin from the dog, no smog
And momma cooked a breakfast with no hog (damn)
I got my grub on, but didn't pig out
Finally got a call from a girl I wanna dig out
(Whassup?) Hooked it up for later as I hit the do'
Thinkin will I live, another twenty-fo'
I gotta go cause I got me a drop top
And if I hit the switch, I can make the ass drop
Had to stop, at a red light
Lookin in my mirror and not a jacker in sight
And everything is alright
I got a beep from Kim, and she can fuck all night
Called up the homies and I'm askin y'all
Which park, are y'all playin basketball?
Get me on the court and I'm trouble
Last week fucked around and got a triple double
Freakin niggaz everyway like M.J.
I can't believe, today was a good day (shit!)

[Verse Two]
Drove to the pad and hit the showers
Didn't even get no static from the cowards
Cause just yesterday them fools tried to blast me
Saw the police and they rolled right past me
No flexin, didn't even look in a nigga's direction
as I ran the intersection
Went to $hort Dog's house, they was watchin Yo! MTV Raps
What's the haps on the craps?
Shake 'em up, shake 'em up, shake 'em up, shake 'em
Roll 'em in a circle of niggaz and watch me break 'em
with the seven, seven-eleven, seven-eleven
Seven even back do' Lil' Joe
I picked up the cash flow
Then we played bones, and I'm yellin domino
Plus nobody I know got killed in South Central L.A.
Today was a good day (shit!)

[Verse Three]
Left my nigga's house paid (what)
Picked up a girl been tryin to fuck since the 12th grade
It's ironic, I had the brew she had the chronic
The Lakers beat the Supersonics
I felt on the big fat fanny
Pulled out the jammy, and killed the punanny
And my dick runs deep, so deep
So deep put her ass to sleep
Woke her up around one
She didn't hesitate, to call Ice Cube the top gun
Drove her to the pad and I'm coastin
Took another sip of the potion hit the three-wheel motion
I was glad everything had worked out
Dropped her ass off and then chirped out
Today was like one of those fly dreams
Didn't even see a berry flashin those high beams
No helicopter looking for a murder 
Two in the mornin got the Fatburger 
Even saw the lights of the Goodyear Blimp
And it read, "Ice Cube's a pimp" (yeah)
Drunk as hell but no throwin up 
Half way home and my pager still blowin up
Today I didn't even have to use my A.K.
I got to say it was a good day (shit!)

[Ice Cube]
Hey wait, wait a minute Pooh, stop this shit
What the fuck I'm thinkin about?












﻿[Ice Cube]
Ice Cube motherfucker
West coast motherfucker

George Bush, George Clinton, Bill Clinton
Chris Farley, Chris Rock, Bob Marley
Rick James, knew how to throw a party
"Smoke some weed!"
Snoop Dogg, all the way to Cheech & Chong
Cypress Hill, Robert Downey hit the bong
Ricky Williams, fuck how Miami feeling
"Smoke some weed!"

[Chorus: Ice Cube]
This is West coast nigga thinking
California quicksand got a nigga sinking
I can give a fuck what you niggaz drinking
"Smoke some weed!"
This is West coast nigga thinking
California quicksand got a nigga sinking
I can give a fuck what you bitches drinking
"Smoke some weed!"

[Ice Cube]
If you a baller, nigga I'm a hall of famer
Lion tamer, with two fo'-fifth flamers
Understand, that yo' life's in danger
Didn't your momma, tell you not to talk to strangers
Lil' nigga, I'm the Hillside Strangler
Have a banger, calling for the Lone Ranger
Most rappers, they wanna fuck sangers
I'm a nigga, that wanna bone T'Penga
G4, pull it up out the hanger
A lil' something, to fuel you niggaz anger
The swine, I'm your face rearranger
In a mansion cause Jesus born in a manger
Motherfucker, belong on Jerry Spranger
I'm a gangsta, up in your CD changer
I'll gank ya, for 20 bucks then I'll thank ya
Police, still get the middle fanger

[Chorus]

[Ice Cube]
Lil' niggaz, don't try this at home
Momma in the bathroom leave her ass alone
Cause she probably taking chronic straight to the dome
Go play you lil' fucker, stop being grown
Dave Chappelle, 50 million and a throne
With a big Zulu bitch, nigga getting blown
Watch your tone, if your wear Coppertone
Go back to Africa used to be a theme song
I'm in the zone, do anybody got a zone
I ain't your poppa, but daddy is a rolling stone
Youse a clone, who don't know the shit you on
Unless it's on, a motherfucking ringtone
I'm in a room with two bottles of Patron
You need a loan, to fuck with the Family Stone
Nigga go on, tell 'em Ice Cube is home
Gorilla niggaz, here come King Kong

[Chorus]

[Ice Cube]
Ice Cube motherfucker
West coast motherfucker
"Smoke some weed!"











﻿[Intro]
Yeah
Every hood's the same [2X]
Come on

[Chorus]
They give us guns and drugs
Then wonder why in the fuck we thugs
They wanna count the slugs
Then come around here and fuck with us (Uh huh)
They give us guns and drugs
Then wonder why in the fuck we thugs
They wanna count the slugs
Then come around here and fuck with us

[Verse 1]
I'm from the land of the gang bang
Since I was little, ain't a god damn thang changed
It's the same ol same
Bush run shit like Sadaam Hussien
I cock and aim, clinically insane
To deal with this bullshit day to day
If I sell some yay or smoke some hay
You bitches wanna throw me up in pelican's bay
Call me an animal up in the system
But who's the animal that built this prison
Who's the animal that invented lower living
The projects, thank god for Russell Simmons
Thank god for Sugarhill
I'm putting a different kind of steel up to my grill
Y'all know what it is, scared for your own kids
How these ghetto niggaz taken over showbiz

[Chorus]

[Verse 2]
It's boyz in the hood, it's toys in the hood
Y'all wanna know why there's noise in the hood
Cause there's drugs in the hood, thugs in the hood
Nigga killed a crip and a blood in the hood (For real)
Cause when niggaz get tribal
It's all about survival, nobody liable
I got caught by five-oh
Grandmama came to court with her Bible
But when the judge hit the gavel
Now I'm too far from my family to travel (Fuck)
I just came unraveled
Socked the D.A. before I got gaffled
Owned by C.A, State Property
Just like the year fifteen fifty three
Looking for me, a one-way ticket out
Don't understand, what's so hard to figure out?

[Chorus]

[Verse 3]
(Damn) I can't take the pressure
Pulled the fo-fo up out the dresser
Grabbed the weight up out the closet
Po-po coming but I'm scared to toss it
Y'all know what happened last time I lost it
Can't tell you niggaz what the fucking boss did
The game got a nigga exhausted
Gotta go for the plea bargain they offered
Twenty years for what?
Breaking these laws that's so corrupt
Taking these halls and filling 'em up
Some powder keg shit that's about to erupt
Ay y'all, I'm about to be stuck
Until the year two thousand, what the fuck?
In the hood, don't press your luck
Cause these motherfuckers will set you up, word up

[Chorus]

[Outro]
Every hood's the same [3X]
Every hood's the same [2X]
Stop tripping on it
Every hood's the same [3X]
Every hood's the same [2X]












﻿[Sample]
"Oh, now you are one lucky nigger"
"You better listen to your boss, white boy"
"Oh, I'mma go walking in the moonlight with you"
"You wanna hold my hand?"
"Hahaha"

[Chorus: Rick Ross]
I need a hundred black coffins for a hundred bad men
A hundred black graves so I can lay they ass in
I need a hundred black preachers with a black sermon to tell
From a hundred black bibles, while we send them all to hell
I need a hundred black coffins, black coffins, black coffins, oh lord
I need a hundred black coffins, black coffins, oh lord, black coffins
I need a hundred...

[Rick Ross]
I seen a hundred niggas die
I put that on my life, lord, I wouldn't tell a lie
Unless it had to do with mine, in the middle of the night
Killas coming for your life, all he wanna do is shine
I broke off the chains, only the realest remain
See you praying to Jesus, but will that help ease the pain
Seen a brother get slain, for a job full of change
Yet I post on the block, look like I'm Big Daddy Kane
Is you a cat or a mouse, keep them rats out the house
Battle scars on my back, nigga, tattoos all around
Hundred dead bitches, hundred black coffins
Money on his head, bitch, I'm trynna make a fortune

[Chorus]

[Rick Ross]
I seen a hundred women burn
As they stood firm, treat a nigga like a germ
What did she do to deserve, put me on the farm
Pig's feet in the jar, serve it to me warm
Any questions, they hang 'em, better pray for Django
Got me working in fields, too many years, it get fatal
All I want is my woman, such a wonderful mother
On the days that it rain, her smile bright like a summer
Our revenge is the sweetest, bitch, cuz I'm coming
Got to die in my arms for what you did to my mother
Hundred dead bitches, hundred black coffins
Twelve gauge shotgun, chest full of copper, boom

[Chorus]












﻿I think I'm big meech Larry Hoover,
whipping work, halleluiah,
one nation under god real niggas getting money from the fucking start. 
I think I'm big meech Larry Hoover,
whipping work, hallelujah,
one nation under god real niggas getting money from the fucking start. 

My Rolls Royce triple black 
I'm iche hoe, 
Balling in the club, bottles like I'm miche hoe 
Rosé that's my nickname 
Cocaine running in my big vain 
Self made you just affiliate 
I build the ground up, you bought it renovated 
Talking plenty capers nothings been authenticated 
Funny you claiming the same bitch that I'm penetrating 
Hold the bottles up where my comrades 
Where the fucking felons, where my dawns at 
I got that entrebunker and it's so white III 
jussssst might charge you double. 

I think I'm big meech Larry Hoover,
getting work, halleluiah,
one nation under god real niggas getting money from the fucking start. 
I think I'm big meech Larry Hoover,
getting work, hallelujah,
one nation under god real niggas getting money from the fucking start. 

These mother fuckers mad that I'm icey, 
Stunt so hard make them come and night me 
I think I'm big meech look at my time peace 
It anodomere hundred wrecks at least 
Look at yourself now look at me 
You cant see a nigga I'm what you you use to be 
Look at it this way you niggaz side ways 
Always getting money my nigaaz time pace 
So fuck a nigga I'm self made 
You a sucka nigga I'm self paid 
This for my broke niggas
This for my rich niggas 
Got a hundred on a head of a snitch nigga 

I think I'm big meech Larry Hoover,
whipping work, hallelujah,
one nation under god real niggas getting money from the fucking start. 
I think I'm big meech Larry Hoover,
whipping work, hallelujah,
one nation under god real niggas getting money from the fucking start.

[Styles P rap]
.....

I think I'm big meech Larry Hoover,
getting work, halleluiah,
one nation under god real niggas getting money from the fucking start. 
I think I'm big meech Larry Hoover,
getting work, hallelujah,
one nation under god real niggas getting money from the fucking start.












﻿[Hook x2: Rick Ross]
They say I'm gettin' money
Must be illuminati
Talking to the Holy Ghost
In my Bugatti
He knockin' on the do' don't let the Devil in
He knockin' on the do' don't let the Devil in

[Verse 1: Rick Ross]
Lord knows, that boy done been about it
Lord knows, that boy'll catch a body
Phone ringing, gotta be the Mexicans
Phone ringing, gotta be the Mexicans
Being dead broke is the root of all evil
Get money, my nigga, do good with your people
I got the calico, I got the dynamite
They wanna do it big? Pick a time tonight
Back to these bitches following my timeline
Back to these crackers following my timeline
Got the phone tapped, I think I'm being followed
Touch him with the Holy Ghost, can you hear me Father?

[Diddy:]
Father, please protect me from brokeness
And bitch ass niggas, Bitch ass bitches too
Keep 'em away

[Hook: Rick Ross]
They say I'm gettin' money
Must be illuminati
Talking to the Holy Ghost
In my Bugatti
He knockin' on the do' don't let the Devil in
He knockin' on the do' don't let the Devil in
They say I'm gettin' money
Must be illuminati
Talking to the Holy Ghost
In my Ferrari
He knockin' on the do' don't let the Devil in
He knockin' on the do' don't let the Devil in

[Verse 2: Rick Ross]
Work! That's all my niggas workin' with
Work! That's all my niggas lurkin' with
My teacher told me that I was a piece of shit
Seen her the other day, driving a piece of shit
Work! Exactly what I'm screamin' ho
Certified, 8 digit nigga, triple beamin' ho
You talkin' to the Holy Ghost
I'm smokin' 'til I overdose
When I fuck she let the pussy soak
Even my lawyer be askin is it dope
Never break the code shock me with a million volts
I'm forever dope, touched by the holy ghost

[Diddy:]
You see, they hate what they don't understand
Father, forgive them
For they know not what they do
Let's go

[Hook: Rick Ross]
They say I'm gettin' money
Must be illuminati
Talking to the Holy Ghost
In my Bugatti
He knockin' on the do' don't let the Devil in
He knockin' on the do' don't let the Devil in
They say I'm gettin' money
Must be illuminati
Talking to the Holy Ghost
In my Ferrari
He knockin' on the do' don't let the Devil in
He knockin' on the do' don't let the Devil in












﻿[Verse 1: Diddy]
You niggas paranoid, I party, getting money
I know I'm the shit, my janitor be getting money
I got a skyscraper, it's a hell of a view
Got me closer to God, angel wings on my coupe
Pray for me; damn, I grind every day for it
If you see me riding in it, it means I paid for it
Bugatti Boy, one point eight four
I got money, baby - I could order eight more
Fuck the Forbes list; let's tell the truth, I ate more
I got a billion, baby - time to get me eight more
Twelve bedrooms, time to get me eight more
Stack all the cases of Ciroc up on the eighth floor

[Hook: Rick Ross and (Diddy)]
Got a hundred mil'
(It's time to get another one)
How this Bugatti feel?
(I may need me another one)
Five bad bitches
(Just got me another one)
P. Diddy run the city
(Never be another one)

Five mil' cash
(And I need another one)
Rocking a different Rollie
(No, it's not the other one)
Second to none at getting money
(Nigga, number one)
Real niggas run the city
(Never be another one)

[Verse 2: Diddy]
These haters speculate
They always watching mine
She know what time it is
Just like my watch line
My clothes line
The cologne, bitch
I know you smell this money, sitting on this throne, bitch
I'm strong, bitch
I own shit
Gave myself a ten-digit bonus
I'm the money man
Money never financed
Come get this money, baby
With your fine ass

If your nigga broke, it's time to get another one
If your bitch is tripping, time to get another one
I'm Puff Daddy, bitch - there'll never be another one
Bugatti Boys forever one

[Hook]

[Verse 3: Rick Ross]
I'm feeling the money
I'm loving the paper
Nigga hating the hood
Took his ho to Jamaica
If I let down the top
Let the breeze in my beard
V.I.P. is the spot
They playing musical chairs
My Colombian the man, all the beam-me-up shorty
Got that money in the bag that can hold a fucking body in
One point five for this brand new black Bugatti
Jewels like I'm Slick Rick, Bally shoes, la di da di
Feeling myself; bitch, you do the same
Fuck what I spend at the bar, you should see how I came
My bitch had a vest, with one foot in the trap
If I bust at your chest, I bet that's a wrap

[Hook]











﻿Young Nino, f-ck a b-tch in a peacoat
Carlito, scarface, al pacino
Bun-B though, pimp c, r.i.p though
I goes deep in that p-ssy, Dan Marino
She wanna be the one, f-ck her to my own single
Break a b-tch heart, no future miss cleo
Snap back, a-a-automatic reload
Flyer than a f-ck-ng beatle, you can't beat 'em
Vampire f-ck up your evening
I pop up and eat lunch, leave you in the cement
Don't believe it, stripe like a f-ck-ng didas
The gun selena, give a n-gga bieber fever
Real f-ck-ng hot, put it in park
Take a shot, higher than a tube sock
You a bop, give me top top, as I load the guap
Man these n-ggas say i'm fly but to her i'm god
[Hook]
I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded
And I don't give a f-ck
[Tyga]
F-ck is up, n-gga's stomping in my chucks
yeah I make it rain, dear, cause i'm all by my bucks
Use the butt up in the front, d-ck up in her cunt
And I put it in her hole, hole in one, putt putt
AHHHHHH
S-Super McNasty, why you McLoving
When the b-tch call me daddy
Pimp no caddy, she wish she never had me
Treat her like a dog, called the b-tch lassy
Young savvy, bang her like cincinatti
Above average, f-fly like i'm aladdin
They bend backwards, throw the p-ssy at them
I'm ben wallace, dunk up in your basket
Balls in the air, no games,
I'm serious, double dare
There's too many bitches,

Why these n-ggas wanna stare
Patron up in here
N-gga this ain't no beer
[Hook]
I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded
And I don't give a f-ck
[Lil' Wayne]
Mama, there go that monster
Abracadabra, magic johnson
My motherf-ck-ng doctor
Said I need a doctor
So I called house,
Now I am a pill popper
Faded like skinnys
Young Money we winning
I told her if I change
She won't get a penny
Milking that sh-t, pregnant b-tch tities
Bringing home the bacon
I'm f-ck-ng miss piggy
Loaded like a semi, send me naked pictures
She knows my d-ck, she call that n-gga Richard
Prior to me cumming, I had to stick thumb in, her ass
one time, smell my finger make you vomit
Flyer than a hornet, the shoe fit I worn it
She tried to j-ck me off, can't beat it, join it
Tunechi, punechi, ever she call it,
Flag scarlett, I killed it, mourn it
[Hook]
Faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded faded
My n-gga I'm faded faded
And I don't give a f-ck











﻿Rack City Bitch, Rack, Rack City Bitch
Ten, Ten, Ten, Twenties On Yo Titties Bitch
Hunded deep V.I.P No Guest List
T Raw You Don't Know Who You You Fuckin Wit
Got Ma Other Bitch Fuckin Wit Ma Other Bitch
Fuckin All Night Nigga We Ain't Celibate
Nigga Said Im Too Dope, I Ain't Selling It
Bar Fresher Then A Ma'Fuckin Peppermint
Gold Letterman's Last King Killin' Shit
Young Money, Young Money Yeah We Gettin' Rich
Get Cha Grandma On My Dick (Haha)
Girl You Know What It Is

Rack City Bitch, Rack, Rack City Bitch (x3)
Ten, Ten, Ten Twenties And Them Fifties Bitch
Rack City Bitch, Rack, Rack City Bitch (x3)
Ten, Ten, Ten Twenties And Them Fifties Bitch

Imma Ma'Fuckin Star (Star)
Look At The Paint On The Car (Car)
Too Much Rim Make The Ride Too Hard

Tell That Bitch Hop Out, Walk The Boulevard
I Need My Money Pronto
Get It In The Morning Like Alonzo, Rondo
Green Got Cheese Like A Nacho
If You Aint Got No Ass Bitch Wear A Poncho
Head Honcho, Got My Seat Back
Niggas Starin' At Me, Dont Get Bapped
Got My Shirt Off, The Club Too Packed
Its Too Turnt, Going Up Like Gas
Goddamn, Pull Out My Rags
Mike, Mike Jackson Nigga Im Back
Ra-Ta-Ta-Tat Tatted Up On My Back
All The Hoes Love Me, You Know What It Is

Rack City Bitch, Rack, Rack City Bitch (x3)
Ten, Ten, Ten Twenties And Them Fifties Bitch
Rack City Bitch, Rack, Rack City Bitch (x3)
Ten, Ten, Ten Twenties And Them Fifties Bitch

Throwin' Hundreds, Hundreds,
Hundreds hundreds
Rack city bitch rack ,rack city bitch (x5)


Read more: TYGA - RACK CITY LYRICS 











