 
 
 
 
 
{{Location map+ | Israel
| AlternativeMap = Historical boundaries of Palestine (plain).svg
| caption =  
 
 
| alt= Palestine is located in Asia
}}
Palestine (   ,  ,  ;  , Palaistin;  ;   and the  , the Southern Levant, de Geus, 2003, p. 7.  Cisjordan, and historically has been known by other names including Canaan, Southern Syria and Kingdom of Jerusalem|Jerusalem.
 Syria and British and modern Israelis and Palestinians.
 mandate period.    Today, the region comprises the State of Israel and the Palestinian territories. 

== Etymology == 
 
 transliterated from hieroglyphs as Medinet Habu, which record a people called the Peleset among the Sea Peoples who invaded Egypt in Ramesses IIIs reign. Fahlbusch et al., 2005, p. 185.  The Assyrians called the same region Palashtu or Pilistu, beginning with Adad-nirari III in the Nimrud Slab in c.800 BCE through to emperor Sargon II, in his Annals approximately a century later.  Sharon, 1988, p. 4.   
 The Histories, male circumcision writes that the Phoenicians and the Syrians in Palestine (    ) concur in maintaining they learnt the custom fromn the Egyptians. Herodotus,The Histories.Bk.2,104:3; at David Asheri, Alan Lloyd, Aldo Corcella Pausanias also Roman authorities, following the suppression of the Bar Kokhba Revolt, combined Iudaea Province with Galilee and other surrounding cities such as Ashkelon to form "Syria Palaestina" ( ), which some scholars state was in order to complete the dissociation with Judaea. {{cite web
| url = http://www.usd.edu/~clehmann/erp/Palestine/history.htm#135-337
| title = Palestine: History: 135337: Syria Palaestina and the Tetrarchy
| accessdate = 6 July 2008
| last = Lehmann
| first = Clayton Miles
| year = 1998
| month = Summer
| work = The On-line Encyclopedia of the Roman Provinces
| publisher = University of South Dakota
}}
  Sharon, 1998, p. 4. According to Moshe Sharon: "Eager to obliterate the name of the rebellious Iudaea Province|Judaea", the Roman authorities (General Hadrian) renamed it Palaestina or Syria Palaestina. 
 Hebrew name Historical books (see Deuteronomistic history) include most of the biblical references, almost 200 of which are in the Book of Judges and the Books of Samuel, where the term is used to denote the southern coastal region to the west of the ancient Kingdom of Judah.  Room, 1997, p. 285.  Robinson, Edward, Physical geography of the Holy Land, Crocker & Brewster, Boston, 1865, p.15. Robinson, writing in 1865 when travel by Europeans to the Ottoman Empire became common asserts that, "Palestine, or Palestina, now the most common name for the Holy Land, occurs three times in the English version of the Old Testament; and is there put for the Hebrew name , elsewhere rendered Philistia. As thus used, it refers strictly and only to the country of the Philistines, in the southwest corner of the land. So, too, in the Greek form, ), it is used by Josephus. But both Josephus and Philo apply the name to the whole land of the Hebrews ; and Greek and Roman writers employed it in the like extent."  
 Byzantine period, Arabic word place names Hebrew (Semitic) The Palestine Mandate.
 Kingdom of Israel, Kingdom of Jerusalem, Land of Israel (Eretz Yisrael or Haaretz),  Zion, Retenu (Ancient Egyptian), Southern Syria, Southern Levant  and Syria Palestina.

== History ==
   

=== Overview === Syria and British and modern Israelis and Palestinians. Modern archaeologists and historians of the region refer to their field of study as Syro-Palestinian archaeology.

 

=== Ancient period ===
 s 1915 Atlas of the Historical Geography of the Holy Land. Smiths book was used as a reference by Lloyd George during the negotiations for the British Mandate for Palestine. ]] Minoan Crete, Battle of United Kingdom Kingdom of deported to return to Jerusalem.

=== Classical antiquity ===
  (map by Claude Reignier Conder of the Palestine Exploration Fund)]] sacked Jerusalem, Constantine in the Civil Wars of the Tetrarchy (306324), the Christianization of the Roman Empire began, and in 326, Constantine I|Constantines mother Saint Helena visited Jerusalem and began the construction of churches and shrines. Palestine became a center of Christianity, attracting numerous monks and religious scholars. The Samaritan Revolts during this period caused their near extinction. In 614 CE, Palestine was annexed by another Persian dynasty; the Sassanids, until returning to Byzantine control in 628 CE. 

=== Middle Ages ===
  Berber army, invaded the region in 970, a date that marks the beginning of a period of unceasing warfare between numerous enemies, which destroyed Palestine, and in particular devastating its Jewish population.   In 1073, Palestine was captured by the Great Seljuq Empire, only to be recaptured by the Fatimids in 1098, who then lost the region to the Crusaders in 1099. Their control of Jerusalem and most of Palestine lasted almost a century until defeat by Saladins forces in 1187, after which most of Palestine was controlled by the Ayyubids. A rump crusader state in the northern coastal cities survived for another century, but, despite seven further crusades, the crusaders were no longer a significant power in the region. The Fourth Crusade led directly to the decline of the Byzantine Empire, dramatically reducing Christian influence throughout the region.
 Mamluk Sultanate was indirectly created in Egypt as a result of the Seventh Crusade. The Mongol Empire reached Palestine for the first time in 1260, beginning with the Mongol raids into Palestine under Nestorian Christian general Kitbuqa, and reaching an apex at the pivotal Battle of Ain Jalut. In 1486, hostilities broke out between the Mamluks and the Ottoman Turks in a battle for control over western Asia, and the Ottomans captured Palestine in 1516.

=== Modern period ===
  and Sir Wyndham Deedes, 1920.]]
 
 
 
  Muhammad Alis Muhammad Alis Egypt, but in 1840, Britain intervened and returned control of the Levant to the Ottomans in return for further Capitulations of the Ottoman Empire|capitulations. The end of the 19th century saw the beginning of Zionist immigration and the Revival of the Hebrew language. The movement was publicly supported by Great Britain during World War I with the Balfour Declaration of 1917.
 southern Palestine Jerusalem by the end of the year.
 secured Jerusalem in 1918 Megiddo in September.
 the mandate 1929 and General Assembly resolution recommending civil war declared in 1948. 
 captured the captured by First Palestinian security barrier. Following Israels unilateral disengagement plan of 2004, it withdrew all settlers and most of the military presence from the Gaza strip, but maintained control of the air space and coast. In 2012, the State of Palestine replaced the PLO as UN observer following United Nations General Assembly resolution 67/19.  

In late 2012, a donation of $21.6 million was announced by the Government of the Netherlandsthe Dutch government stated that the funds would be provided to the UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), for the specific benefit of Palestinian children. An article, published by the UN News website, stated that: "Of the $21.6 million, $5.7 will be allocated to UNRWAs 2012 Emergency Appeal for the occupied Palestinian territory, which will support programmes in the West Bank and Gaza aiming to mitigate the effects on refugees of the deteriorating situation they face."   

 

== Boundaries ==
The boundaries of Palestine have varied throughout history. According to the Jewish Encyclopedia published between 1901 and 1906: "Palestine extends, from 31 to 33 20 N. latitude. Its southwest point (at Raphia = Tell Rifa, southwest of Gaza) is about 34 15 E. longitude, and its northwest point (mouth of the Liani) is at 35 15 E. longitude, while the course of the Jordan reaches 35 35 to the east. The west-Jordan country has, consequently, a length of about 150 English miles from north to south, and a breadth of about 23 miles at the north and 80 miles at the south. The area of this region, as measured by the surveyors of the English Palestine Exploration Fund, is about 6,040 square miles. The east-Jordan district is now being surveyed by the German Palstina-Verein, and although the work is not yet completed, its area may be estimated at 4,000 square miles. This entire region, as stated above, was not occupied exclusively by the Israelites, for the plain along the coast in the south belonged to the Philistines, and that in the north to the Phoenicians, while in the east-Jordan country, the Israelitic possessions never extended farther than the Arnon (Wadi al-Mujib) in the south, nor did the Israelites ever settle in the most northerly and easterly portions of the plain of Bashan. To-day the number of inhabitants does not exceed 650,000. Palestine, and especially the Israelitic state, covered, therefore, a very small area, approximating that of the state of Vermont." From the Jewish Encyclopedia    According to the Encyclopdia Britannica Eleventh Edition (1911),   Palestine is:

:"  geographical name of rather loose application. Etymological strictness would require it to denote exclusively the narrow strip of coast-land once occupied by the Philistines, from whose name it is derived. It is, however, conventionally used as a name for the territory which, in the Old Testament, is claimed as the inheritance of the pre-exilic Hebrews; thus it may be said generally to denote the southern third of the province of Syria.
:Except in the west, where the country is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea, the limit of this territory cannot be laid down on the map as a definite line. The modern subdivisions under the jurisdiction of the Ottoman Empire are in no sense conterminous with those of antiquity, and hence do not afford a boundary by which Palestine can be separated exactly from the rest of Syria in the north, or from the Sinaitic and Arabian deserts in the south and east; nor are the records of ancient boundaries sufficiently full and definite to make possible the complete demarcation of the country. Even the convention above referred to is inexact: it includes the Philistine territory, claimed but never settled by the Hebrews, and excludes the outlying parts of the large area claimed in Num. xxxiv. as the Hebrew possession (from the " River of Egypt " to Hamath). However, the Hebrews themselves have preserved, in the proverbial expression " from Dan to Beersheba " (Judg. xx.i, &c.), an indication of the normal north-and-south limits of their land; and in defining the area of the country under discussion it is this indication which is generally followed. Crusader states biblical period, Jund al-Urdun, while the southern parts of the latter two formed part of Jund Dimashq, which during the ninth century was attached to the administrative unit of Jund Filasteen ( ).   
 Latin in the 1st century CE, describes a region of Syria that was "formerly called Palaestina" among the areas of the Eastern Mediterranean. 

Since the Byzantine Period, the Byzantine borders of Palaestina (I and II, also known as Palaestina Prima, "First Palestine", and Palaestina Secunda, "Second Palestine"), have served as a name for the geographic area between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea. Under Arab rule, Filastin (or Jund Filastin) was used administratively to refer to what was under the Byzantines Palaestina Secunda (comprising Judaea and Samaria), while Palaestina Prima (comprising the Galilee region) was renamed Urdunn ("Jordan" or Jund al-Urdunn). 
 Allied Powers Ottoman Vilayet of Damascus (Syria), while the southern part of Jordan was part of the Vilayet of Hejaz. What later became part of British Mandate Palestine was in Ottoman times divided between the Vilayet of Beirut (Lebanon) and the Sanjak of Jerusalem. 
 Zionist Organization Paris Peace Palestine as their homeland, its boundaries are those of Mandate Palestine excluding the Transjordan, as described in the Palestinian National Charter. Said and Hitchens, 2001, p. 199. 

== Demographics ==
 

=== Early demographics ===
Estimating the population of Palestine in antiquity relies on two methods  censuses and writings made at the times, and the scientific method based on excavations and statistical methods that consider the number of settlements at the particular age, area of each settlement, density factor for each settlement.
 Israeli archaeologist "...&nbsp;the population of Palestine in antiquity did not exceed a million persons. It can also be shown, moreover, that this was more or less the size of the population in the peak periodthe late Byzantine period, around AD 600"  Similarly, a study by Yigal Shiloh of The Hebrew University suggests that the population of Palestine in the Iron Age could have never exceeded a million. He writes: "...&nbsp;the population of the country in the Roman-Byzantine period greatly exceeded that in the Iron Age...If we accept Broshis population estimates, which appear to be confirmed by the results of recent research, it follows that the estimates for the population during the Iron Age must be set at a lower figure." 

=== Late Ottoman and British Mandate periods ===
In the middle of the 1st century of the Ottoman rule, i.e. 1550 AD, Bernard Lewis in a study of Ottoman registers of the early Ottoman Rule of Palestine reports: 
 From the mass of detail in the registers, it is possible to extract something like a general picture of the economic life of the country in that period. Out of a total population of about 300,000 souls, between a fifth and a quarter lived in the six towns of Jerusalem, Gaza, Safed, Nablus, Ramla|Ramle, and Hebron. The remainder consisted mainly of peasants, living in villages of varying size, and engaged in agriculture. Their main food-crops were wheat and barley in that order, supplemented by leguminous pulses, olives, fruit, and vegetables. In and around most of the towns there was a considerable number of vineyards, orchards, and vegetable gardens.
 

According to Alexander Scholch, the population of Palestine in 1850 was about 350,000 inhabitants, 30% of whom lived in 13 towns; roughly 85% were Muslims, 11% were Christians and 4% Jews 
 Ottoman statistics Justin McCarthy,  the population of Palestine in the early 19th century was 350,000, in 1860 it was 411,000 and in 1900 about 600,000 of whom 94% were Arabs. In 1914 Palestine had a population of 657,000 Muslim Arabs, 81,000 Christian Arabs, and 59,000 Jews.  McCarthy estimates the non-Jewish population of Palestine at 452,789 in 1882; 737,389 in 1914; 725,507 in 1922; 880,746 in 1931; and 1,339,763 in 1946. 

In 1920, the League of Nations Interim Report on the Civil Administration of Palestine stated that there were 700,000 people living in Palestine:
 Of these, 235,000 live in the larger towns, 465,000 in the smaller towns and villages. Four-fifths of the whole population are Moslems. A small proportion of these are Bedouin Arabs; the remainder, although they speak Arabic and are termed Arabs, are largely of mixed race. Some 77,000 of the population are Christians, in large majority belonging to the Orthodox Church, and speaking Arabic. The minority are members of the Latin or of the Uniate Greek Catholic Church, ora small numberare Protestants.

The Jewish element of the population numbers 76,000. Almost all have entered Palestine during the last 40 years. Prior to 1850, there were in the country only a handful of Jews. In the following 30 years, a few hundreds came to Palestine. Most of them were animated by religious motives; they came to pray and to die in the Holy Land, and to be buried in its soil. After the persecutions in Russia forty years ago, the movement of the Jews to Palestine assumed larger proportions.| }}

By 1948, the population had risen to 1,900,000, of whom 68% were Arabs, and 32% were Jews (UNSCOP report, including bedouin).

=== Current demographics ===
 
 Sabras (Israeli-born), Arab countries.   
 outposts in various lands adjacent to the state of Israel occupied by Israel during the Six Day War.   

According to Palestinian evaluations, The West Bank is inhabited by approximately 2.4 million Palestinians and the Gaza Strip by 