  
 
 
  cognitive scientist. physiological and neurobiological processes that underlie certain cognitive functions and behaviors.

  brain functioning, cognitivists explore correlational relationships deductive methods, clinical and counseling psychologists—at symbolic interpretation inductive techniques. Psychology has been described as a "hub science",  with psychological findings linking to research and perspectives from the social sciences, natural sciences, medicine, and the humanities, such as philosophy.

  assessment and treatment of human activity. school settings. industrial and human development the media, forensic investigation and other aspects of legal psychology|law.

==Etymology== humanist and Latinist Marko Marulić in his book, Psichiologia de ratione animae humanae in the late 15th century or early 16th century.  The earliest known reference to the word psychology in English was by Steven Blankaart in 1694 in The Physical Dictionary which refers to "Anatomy, which treats of the Body, and Psychology, which treats of the Soul." (Steven Blankaart, p. 13) as quoted in "psychology n." A Dictionary of Psychology. Edited by Andrew M. Colman. Oxford University Press 2009. Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press.   

==History==
 
  (seated) with colleagues in his psychological laboratory, the first of its kind. Wundt is credited with setting up psychology as a field of scientific inquiry independent of the disciplines philosophy and biology.]] philosophical context De Anima treatise),  as the first significant body of work in the West to be rich in psychological thought.  As early as the 4th century BC, Greek physician Hippocrates theorized that mental disorders were of a physical, rather than divine, nature. 

===Structuralism===
 
German physician  , a major figure in early American psychology, was a structuralist thinker opposed to functionalist approaches.

===Functionalism===
 
Functionalism formed as a reaction to the theories of the structuralist school of thought and was heavily influenced by the work of the American philosopher, scientist, and psychologist William James. James felt that psychology should have practical value, and that psychologists should find out how the mind can function to a persons benefit. In his book, Principles of Psychology,  published in 1890, he laid the foundations for many of the questions that psychologists would explore for years to come. Other major functionalist thinkers included John Dewey and Harvey Carr.

Other 19th-century contributors to the field include the German psychologist Hermann Ebbinghaus, a pioneer in the experimental study of memory, who developed quantitative models of learning and forgetting at the University of Berlin,  and the Russian-Soviet physiologist Ivan Pavlov, who discovered in dogs a learning process that was later termed "classical conditioning" and applied to human beings. 

Starting in the 1950s, the experimental techniques set forth by Wundt, James, Ebbinghaus, and others would be reiterated as experimental psychology became increasingly   and behaviorism, that had developed in the meantime.

===Psychoanalysis===
  free association and a therapeutic interest in dream interpretation.  

 . Front row:  , Ernest Jones, Sándor Ferenczi.]] archetypal and Process Oriented Psychology|process-oriented schools. 

Psychoanalytic theory and therapy were criticized by psychologists such as  al data. By the end of 20th century, psychology departments in  , as reported in the  ; Damásio, A. (1996). The somatic marker hypothesis and the possible functions of the prefrontal cortex; Damásio, A. (1999). The feeling of what happens: Body and emotion in the making of consciousness; Damásio, A. (2003). Looking for Spinoza: Joy, sorrow, and the feeling brain);  . Original work published 1996. ISBN 0-684-83659-9);   (Sacks, O. (1984). A leg to stand on. New York: Summit Books/Simon and Schuster);   maintained that Freud was not a "scientist at all, but ... an hermeneutics|interpreter." 

===Behaviorism===
 
 , a mechanical invention to automate the task of programmed instruction.]]
In the United States, behaviorism became the dominant school of thought during the 1950s. Behaviorism is a discipline that was established in the early 20th century by John B. Watson, and embraced and extended by Edward Thorndike, Clark L. Hull, Edward C. Tolman, and later B.F. Skinner. Theories of learning emphasized the ways in which people might be predisposed, or conditioned, by their environments to behave in certain ways.
 stimuli and the degree of pleasure or pain that follows. Behavioral patterns, then, were understood to consist of organisms conditioned responses to the stimuli in their environment. The stimuli were held to exert influence in proportion to their prior repetition or to the previous intensity of their associated pain or pleasure. Much research consisted of laboratory-based animal experimentation, which was increasing in popularity as physiology grew more sophisticated.
 dualistic explanations such as "mind" or "consciousness"; and, in lieu of probing an "unconscious mind" that underlies unawareness, they spoke of the "contingency-shaped behaviors" in which unawareness becomes outwardly manifest. 
 operant (or instrumental) conditioning, first by Miller and Kanorski and then by Skinner.   Skinners version of behaviorism emphasized operant conditioning, through which behaviors are strengthened or weakened by their consequences.

Linguist Noam Chomskys critique of the behaviorist model of language acquisition is widely regarded as a key factor in the decline of behaviorisms prominence.    Martin Seligman and colleagues discovered that the conditioning of dogs led to outcomes ("learned helplessness") that opposed the predictions of behaviorism.   But Skinners behaviorism did not die, perhaps in part because it generated successful practical applications.  The fall of behaviorism as an overarching model in psychology, however, gave way to a new dominant paradigm: cognitive approaches. 

===Humanism===
 
  hierarchy of human needs, and Carl Rogers, who created and developed client-centered therapy. Later, positive psychology opened up humanistic themes to scientific modes of exploration.

===Gestalt===
  breaking down thoughts and behavior to their smallest element, the Gestalt position maintains that the whole of experience is important, and the whole is different than the sum of its parts.

Gestalt psychology should not be confused with the Gestalt therapy of Fritz Perls, which is only peripherally linked to Gestalt psychology.

===Existentialism===
  existential psychotherapy, a method of therapy that operates on the belief that inner conflict within a person is due to that individuals confrontation with the givens of existence.

Existential psychologists differed from others often classified as humanistic in their comparatively neutral view of human nature and in their relatively positive assessment of anxiety.    Existential psychologists emphasized the humanistic themes of death, free will, and meaning, suggesting that meaning can be shaped by myths, or narrative patterns,    and that it can be encouraged by an acceptance of the free will requisite to an authenticity (philosophy)|authentic, albeit often anxious, regard for death and other future prospects.
 existentialist analysis will to will to pleasure. 
 George Kelly may be said to belong to the existential school.   

===Cognitivism===
 
 ]]
Cognitive psychology is the branch of psychology that studies mental processes including problem solving, perception, memory, and learning. As part of the larger field of cognitive science, this branch of psychology is related to other disciplines including neuroscience, philosophy, and linguistics.

 s, such as Albert Bandura, argued that the childs environment could make contributions of its own to the behaviors of an observant subject. 

 . Psychologists make inferences about mental processes from shared phenomena such as optical illusions.]] cognitivism had become the dominant paradigm of psychology, and cognitive psychology emerged as a popular branch.
 subliminal processing Albert Ellis and American psychiatrist Aaron T. Beck. Cognitive psychology was subsumed along with other disciplines, such as philosophy of mind, computer science, and neuroscience, under the cover discipline of cognitive science.
 <!--
Misplaced and/or excessive passage on specifically *clinical* BPS approach:
===Biopsychosocial model===
 
The biopsychosocial model is an integrated perspective toward understanding consciousness, behavior, and social interaction. It assumes that any given behavior or mental process affects and is affected by dynamically interrelated biological, psychological, and social factors.  The psychological aspect refers to the role that cognition and emotions play in any given psychological phenomenon—for example, the effect of mood or beliefs and expectations on an individuals reactions to an event. The biological aspect refers to the role of biological factors in psychological phenomena—for example, the effect of the prenatal environment on brain development and cognitive abilities, or the influence of genes on individual dispositions. The socio-cultural aspect refers to the role that social and cultural environments play in a given psychological phenomenon—for example, the role of parental or peer influence in the behaviors or characteristics of an individual.-->

 

==Subfields==
 
 
Psychology encompasses a vast domain and includes many different approaches to the study of mental processes and behavior.

===Biological===
 
  depicting the human brain. The arrow indicates the position of the hypothalamus.]]
Biological psychology or behavioral neuroscience is the study of the biological substrates of behavior and mental processes. There are different specialties within behavioral neuroscience. For example, physiological psychologists use animal models, typically rats, to study the neural, genetic, and cellular mechanisms that underlie specific behaviors such as learning and memory and fear responses.  Cognitive neuroscientists investigate the neural correlates of psychological processes in humans using neural imaging tools, and neuropsychologists conduct psychological assessments to determine, for instance, specific aspects and extent of cognitive deficit caused by brain damage or disease.

===Clinical===
 
 
Clinical psychology includes the study and application of psychology for the purpose of understanding, preventing, and relieving psychologically based distress or  —this area is known as clinical neuropsychology. In many countries, clinical psychology is a regulated mental health profession.
 cognitive behavioral, eclectic therapeutic orientation.     

===Cognitive===
 
 
 Green   Red   Blue   Purple   Blue   Purple 
----
 Blue   Purple   Red   Green   Purple   Green 
----
The Stroop effect refers to the fact that naming the color of the first set of words is easier and quicker than the second.
  mental processes functionalism and experimental psychology.
 logicians and social scientists. Computational models are sometimes used to simulate phenomena of interest. Computational models provide a tool for studying the functional organization of the mind whereas neuroscience provides measures of brain activity.
 

===Comparative===
  can use tools. This chimpanzee is using a stick in order to get food.]]
 
Comparative psychology refers to the scientific study of the behavior and mental processes of non-human animals, especially as these relate to the phylogenetic history, adaptive significance, and development of behavior. Research in this area addresses many different issues, uses many different methods, and explores the behavior of many different species, from insects to primates. It is closely related to other disciplines that study animal behavior such as ethology.  Research in comparative psychology sometimes appears to shed light on human behavior, but some attempts to connect the two have been quite controversial, for example the Sociobiology of E. O. Wilson.  Animal models are often used to study neural processes related to human behavior, e.g. in cognitive neuroscience.

===Developmental===
 
 

Mainly focusing on the development of the human mind through the life span, developmental psychology seeks to understand how people come to perceive, understand, and act within the world and how these processes change as they age. This may focus on cognitive, affective, moral development|moral, social, or neural development. Researchers who study children use a number of unique research methods to make observations in natural settings or to engage them in experimental tasks. Such tasks often resemble specially designed games and activities that are both enjoyable for the child and scientifically useful, and researchers have even devised clever methods to study the mental processes of infants. In addition to studying children, developmental psychologists also study aging and processes throughout the life span, especially at other times of rapid change (such as adolescence and old age). Developmental psychologists draw on the full range of psychological theories to inform their research.
 

===Educational and school===
 
 
Educational psychology is the study of how humans learn in educational settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of teaching, and the social psychology of schools as organizations. The work of child psychologists such as Lev Vygotsky, Jean Piaget, Bernard Luskin, and Jerome Bruner has been influential in creating teaching methods and educational practices. Educational psychology is often included in teacher education programs in places such as North America, Australia, and New Zealand.
 gifted students; to facilitate prosocial behaviors in adolescents; and otherwise to promote safe, supportive, and effective learning environments. School psychologists are trained in educational and behavioral assessment, intervention, prevention, and consultation, and many have extensive training in research. 

===Evolutionary===
  modern evolutionary perspective. It seeks to identify which human psychological traits are evolved adaptations, that is, the functional products of natural selection or sexual selection. Evolutionary psychologists suggest that psychological adaptations evolved to solve recurrent problems in human ancestral environments. By focusing on the evolution of psychological traits and their adaptive functions, it offers complementary explanations for the mostly proximate or developmental explanations developed by other areas of psychology (that is, it focuses mostly on ultimate or "why?" questions, rather than proximate or "how?" questions).

===Industrial–organizational===
 
Industrial and organizational psychology (I–O) applies psychological concepts and methods to optimize human potential in the workplace. Personnel psychology, a subfield of I–O psychology, applies the methods and principles of psychology in selecting and evaluating workers. I–O psychologys other subfield, organizational psychology, examines the effects of work environments and management styles on worker motivation, job satisfaction, and productivity. 

===Personality===
 
 &mdash;in individuals. Theories of personality vary across different psychological schools and orientations. They carry different assumptions about such issues as the role of the  , neuroticism, and psychoticism. Raymond Cattell proposed a theory of 16 personality factors. Dimensional models of personality are receiving increasing support, and some version of dimensional assessment will be included in the forthcoming DSM-V.

===Social===
 
 
  studies the nature and causes of social behavior.]] microsocial level. implicit measures, mediational models, and the interaction of both person and social variables in accounting for behavior. The study of human society is therefore a potentially valuable source of information about the causes of psychiatric disorder. Some of the sociological concepts applied to psychiatric disorders are the social role, sick role, social class, life event, culture, migration, social, and total institution. 

===Positive===
  body image problems.

==Research methods