 
 
 
 
  
Rapping (also known as emceeing,  MCing,  spitting (bars),  or rhyming ) refers to "spoken or chanted rhyming lyrics".  The art form can be broken down into different components, as in the book How to Rap where it is separated into content, flow (rhythm and rhyme), and delivery.  Rapping is distinct from spoken word poetry in that it is performed in time to a beat.  
 Cake and Kwaito music, beat or African American dialect of English in the 1960s meaning "to converse", and very soon after that in its present usage as a term denoting the musical style.  Today, the terms "rap" and "rapping" are so closely associated with hip hop music that many use the terms interchangeably.

==History==
 
 , an early blues group, whose lyrical content and rhythmic singing predated rapping.]] header = The roots of rapping
   |filename=DeepDowninMyHeart.ogg
   |title=Deep Down in My Heart spiritual performed by W. M. Givens in Darien, Georgia in 1926.
   |filename2=DollarMamie.ogg
   |title2=Dollar Mamie
   |description2=A Southern work song performed by Judge "Bootmouth" Tucker and Alexander "Neighborhood" Williams in 1939.
   |filename3=
   |title3=Small Talk at 125th and Lennox
   |description3=Gil Scott Herons spoken word poetry has had a significant influence on hip hop through its political and socially conscious lyrics.
}}

===Etymology===
Over many centuries, the meaning of the English verb rap was gradually extended from hit, strike, especially repetitively and rapidly to parley, and finally, speak lyrics to a beat measure (whether or not the beat itself is physically present).

By the late 1960s, when Hubert G. Brown changed his name to H. Rap Brown, rap was a slang term referring to an oration or speech, such as was common among the hip crowd in the protest movements, but it did not come to be associated with a musical style for another decade. 
 
Rap thus etymologically means "fast read" or "spoken fast". It may be from a shortening of repartee. 

===Roots===
 
Rapping can be traced back to its African roots. Centuries before hip hop music existed, the griots of West Africa were delivering stories rhythmically, over drums and sparse instrumentation. Such connections have been acknowledged by many modern artists, modern day "griots", spoken word artists, mainstream news sources, and academics.    
 rooted in spirituals of slavery and influenced greatly by West African musical traditions, was first played by blacks, and later by some whites, in the Mississippi Delta region of the United States around the time of the Emancipation Proclamation. Grammy-winning blues musician/historian Elijah Wald and others have argued that the blues were being rapped as early as the 1920s.     Wald went so far as to call hip hop "the living blues."  Jazz, which developed from the blues and other African-American and European musical traditions and originated around the beginning of the 20th century, has also influenced hip hop and has been cited as a precursor of hip hop. Not just jazz music and lyrics but also Jazz poetry. According to John Sobol, the jazz musician and poet who wrote Digitopia Blues, rap "bears a striking resemblance to the evolution of jazz both stylistically and formally." Sobol, John. (2002). Digitopia Blues. Banff Centre Press. ISBN 978-0-920159-89-7 
One of the main influences on Hip Hop artists was James Brown. James Brown is credited for inventing funk music in the middle 60s. The characteristic funk drum beat is the most common rhythm used for rap music. Two of the earliest recordings which have a funk beat and lyrics which are rhymed in rhythm over this type of beat were released by comedian Pigmeat Markham, "Here Come the Judge" which was released in 1968 by the Chess label and in 1969 another song about running numbers called "Who Got The Number?".
"Here Comes the Judge" peaked at number 19 on the Billboard charts. While it was primarily a comical song about a Judge and his courtroom it is also notable for the political lyrics "Im goin to Paris to stop this war" and "I had a chat with Ho Chi Minh" both social commentary references about wanting to go to the Paris Peace Accord negotiations to stop the war in Vietnam. 

The spoken word   (Pieces of a Man, Winter in America) have been cited as major influences on hip hop, in terms of sound and lyrical style. Similar in style, the Last Poets who formed in 1969 recited political poetry over drum beats and other instrumentation, and were another predecessor for rap music. They released their debut album in 1970 reaching the top ten on the Billboard charts. 
 Meridith Wilsons Mickey as Chess have Ernst Tochs Darius Milhauds 1915 ballet Les Chophores.  Although these probably did not have a direct influence on raps development in the African American cultural sphere, they paved the way for acceptance of spoken word music in the media market. 

More directly related to the African American community were items like schoolyard chants and taunts, clapping games,  Skipping-rope rhyme|jump-rope rhymes, some with unwritten folk histories going back hundreds of years across many nationalities. Sometimes these items contain racially offensive lyrics.  A related area that is not strictly folklore is rhythmical cheering and cheerleading for military and sports.
 American music. deejays were dubbed Jamaican beats. It was called "rap", expanding the words earlier meaning in the African-American community"to discuss or debate informally." The earlier meaning being "a usage well established among African-Americans by the 1960s.", according to The American Heritage Dictionary, 4th Edition. 

One of the first rappers in the beginning of the hip hop period, in the end of 70s, was also hip hops first DJ, Kool Herc. Herc, a Jamaican immigrant, started delivering simple raps at his parties, inspired by the Jamaican tradition of deejay (Jamaican)|toasting.  By the end of the 1970s, artists such as Kurtis Blow and The Sugarhill Gang were just starting to receive radio airplay and make an impact far outside of the New York area, on a national scale.

===Old school rap===
Old school rap (19791984)  was "easily identified by its relatively simple raps"    according to Allmusic, "the emphasis was not on lyrical technique, but simply on good times",  one notable exception being Melle Mel, who set the way for future rappers through his socio-political content and creative wordplay. 

===The golden age=== golden age is considered to have ended around 9394, marking the end of rap lyricisms most innovative period.  

==Flow==
{{Listen|type=music|header=Rapping
   |filename=Planet_Rock.ogg
   |title=Planet Rock electro with old school rapping and beats. Bambaataa, the DJ, is also the rapper in this song; the first rapping in hip hop was done from behind the turntables.
   |filename2=
   |title2=Niggas Bleed
   |description2=Notorious B.I.G. tells vivid stories about his everyday life as a criminal in Brooklyn. Note the constant changing up of the lyrical flow and cadence characteristic of new school hip hop.
}}

"Flow" is defined as "the rhythms and rhymes"    of a hip-hop songs lyrics and how they interact  the book How to Rap breaks flow down into rhyme, rhyme schemes, and rhythm (also known as cadence (music)|cadence).  Flow is also sometimes used to refer to elements of the delivery (Pitch (music)|pitch, timbre, Loudness|volume) as well,  though often a distinction is made between the flow and the delivery.  

Staying on the beat is central to raps flow   many MCs note the importance of staying on-beat in How to Rap including Sean Price, Mighty Casey, Zion I, Vinnie Paz, Fredro Starr, Del The Funky Homosapien, Tech N9ne, People Under The Stairs, Twista, B-Real, Mr Lif, 2Mex, and Cage (rapper)|Cage. 

  describes how this works in his book Poetic Rhythm  "rap lyrics are written to be performed to an accompaniment that emphasizes the metrical structure of the verse".  He says rap lyrics are made up of, "lines with four stressed beats, separated by other syllables that may vary in number and may include other stressed syllables. The strong beat of the accompaniment coincides w