 
 
  pantheist religion founded during the 15th century in the Punjab region, by Guru Nanak   and continued to progress through the ten successive Sikh gurus (the last guru being the holy scripture Guru Granth Sahib). It is the Major religious groups|fifth-largest organized religion in the world, with approximately 30 million Sikhs.  
This system of religious philosophy and expression has been traditionally known as the Gurmat (literally wisdom of the Gur). Punjab, India is the only region in the world with a majority Sikh population. 
 vices and be able to be constantly immersed in virtues clarified in the Guru Granth Sahib.

The principal beliefs of Sikhi are faith in Wahegururepresented by the phrase  , meaning one God, who prevails in everything, along with a praxis in which the Sikh is enjoined to engage in social reform through the pursuit of justice for all human beings. Sikhi teaches that God is Akal Purakh (eternal) and advocates the pursuit of salvation in a social context through the congregational practice of meditation on the name and message of God. The followers of Sikhi are ordained to follow the teachings of the ten Sikh gurus, or enlightened leaders, as well as the holy scripture entitled the Gur Granth Shib, which, along with the writings of six of the ten Sikh Gurus, includes selected works of many devotees from diverse socio-economic and religious backgrounds. Guru Gobind Singh, the tenth guru, conferred the leadership of the Sikh community to the Gur Granth Shib and the corporate body of the Khls Panth (the Granth and the Panth). Sikhis traditions and teachings are associated with the history, society and culture of Punjab. Adherents of Sikh are known as Sikhs (students or disciples) and number over 30 million across the world.
 Pakistani Punjab. 

== Philosophy and teachings ==
 
  was the founder of the religion of Sikhism and the first of the eleven Sikh Gurus, the eleventh being the living Guru, Guru Granth Sahib.]]
 , known popularly as the Golden Temple, is a sacred shrine for Sikhs.]]
The origins of Sikhism lie in the teachings of Guru Nanak and his successors. The essence of Sikh teaching is summed up by Guru Nanak in these words: "Realization of Truth is higher than all else. Higher still is truthful living".  Sikh teaching emphasizes the principle of equality of all humans and rejects discrimination on the basis of caste, creed, and gender. Sikh principles encourage living life as a householder.

Sikhi is a  "signifying the universality of God. It states that God is omnipresent and infinite with power over everything, and is signified by the term Ek Onkar|k akr.    Sikhs believe that before creation, all that existed was God and Gods hukam (will or order).  When God willed, the entire cosmos was created. From these beginnings, God nurtured "enticement and attachment" to Maya (illusion)|my, or the human perception of reality. 

While a full understanding of God is beyond human beings,    to progress towards enlightenment. Guru Nanak Dev emphasized the revelation through meditation, as its rigorous application permits the existence of communication between God and human beings.  God has no gender in Sikhi (though translations may incorrectly present a male God); indeed Sikhi teaches that God is "Akaal Purkh" with characteristic of "Nirankar" (Niran meaning "without" and kar meaning "form", hence "without form"). In addition, Nanak wrote that there are many worlds on which God has created life. 

=== Pursuing salvation and Khalsa ===
  (Harmandir Sahib)]] Khalsa Code of Conduct laid out by the tenth guru, Guru Gobind Singh, makes it clear that human birth is obtained with great fortune, therefore one needs to be able to make the most of this chance. The Sikhs believe in living "Chakar Vati"roaming free as freedom, not as slaves or be oppressed.

 , krodh|anger, lobh|greed, moh|attachment, and kam|lustknown as the Five Evilsare believed to be particularly pernicious. The fate of people vulnerable to the Five Evils is separation from God, and the situation may be remedied only after intensive and relentless devotion. 

Shabd#Sikhism|Nabad (the divine Word) emphasizes the totality of the revelation. Nanak designated the word guru (meaning teacher) as the voice of God and the source and guide for knowledge and salvation.    Salvation can be reached only through rigorous and disciplined devotion to God. Nanak distinctly emphasised the irrelevance of outward observations such as rites, pilgrimages, or asceticism. He stressed that devotion must take place through the heart, with the spirit and the soul. According to Gurbani the supreme purpose of human life is to reconnect with Truth. However, our Ego is the biggest disease in the reunion with Truth/God and the solution to this disease also lies within human ego (mind and body). With Gurus grace the seeker meditates honestly on "Word" which leads to the end of ego. Guru is indistinguishable from God and are one and same thing as God which cannot be found with thousands of wisdoms. One gets connected with Guru only with accumulation of selfless search of truth. Ultimately the seeker realizes that it is the consciousness within the body which is seeker/follower and Word is true Guru. The human body is just a means to achieve the reunion with Truth. Truth is a form of matter which lies within the human body but is beyond the realm of time/death. Once truth starts to shine in a persons heart, the essence of current and past holy books of all religions is understood by the person.

A key practice to be pursued is  : remembrance of the divine Name. The verbal repetition of the name of God or a sacred syllable is an established practice in religious traditions in India, but Nanaks interpretation emphasized inward, personal observance. Nanaks ideal is the total exposure of ones being to the divine Name and a total conforming to Dharma or the "Divine Order". Nanak described the result of the disciplined application of   as a "growing towards and into God" through a gradual process of five stages. The last of these is   (The Realm of Truth)the final union of the spirit with God. 

Guru Nanak stressed now  s ( ), giving charitable donations, and working for the good of the community and others (sv).

Sikhs believe that no matter what race, sex, or religion one is, all are equal in Gods eyes. Men and women are equal and share the same rights, and women can lead in prayers.

== Ten gurus and religious authority ==
 
 -style painting from the late 19th century depicting the ten Sikh Gurus with Bhai Bala and Bhai Mardana.]]
The term guru comes from the Sanskrit gur, meaning teacher, guide, or mentor. The traditions and philosophy of Sikhi were established by ten specific gurus from 1469 to 1708. Each guru added to and reinforced the message taught by the previous, resulting in the creation of the Sikh religion. Guru Nanak was the first guru and appointed a disciple as successor. Guru Gobind Singh was the final guru in human form. Before his death, Guru Gobind Singh decreed that the Gur Granth Shib would be the final and perpetual guru of the Sikhs.   

Guru Angad succeeded Guru Nanak. Later, an important phase in the development of Sikhi came with the third successor, Guru Amar Das. Guru Nanaks teachings emphasised the pursuit of salvation; Guru Amar Das began building a cohesive community of followers with initiatives such as sanctioning distinctive ceremonies for birth, marriage, and death. Amar Das also established the manji (comparable to a diocese) system of clerical supervision. 
 ]] Mughal authorities who were suspicious and hostile to the religious order he was developing.  His persecution and death inspired his successors to promote a military and political organization of Sikh communities to defend themselves against the attacks of Mughal forces.
 Guru Hargobind, was responsible for the creation of the concept of Akal Takht (throne of the timeless one), which serves as the supreme decision-making centre of Sikhism and sits opposite the Harmandir Sahib. The   (a representative portion of the Khalsa Panth) historically gathers at the Akal Takht on special festivals such as Vaisakhi or Hola Mohalla and when there is a need to discuss matters that affect the entire Sikh nation. A gurmata|gurmat (literally, gurus intention) is an order passed by the   in the presence of the Gur Granth Shib. A gurmat may only be passed on a subject that affects the fundamental principles of Sikh religion; it is binding upon all Sikhs.  The term Hukamnama|hukamnm (literally, edict or royal order) is often used interchangeably with the term gurmat. However, a hukamnm formally refers to a hymn from the Gur Granth Shib which is a given order to Sikhs.

 
 
ImageSize = width:800 height:200
PlotArea = left:105 bottom:65 top:0 right:55
Alignbars = justify
DateFormat = yyyy
Period = from:1469 till:1708
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal format:yyyy

Colors =
  id:1    value:green      legend:1469-1539
  id:2    value:gray(0.40) legend:1504-1552
  id:3    value:orange     legend:1479-1574
  id:4    value:blue       legend:1534-1581
  id:5    value:purple     legend:1563-1606
  id:6    value:green      legend:1595-1644
  id:7    value:gray(0.40) legend:1630-1661
  id:8    value:orange     legend:1656-1664
  id:9    value:blue       legend:1621-1675
  id:10   value:purple     legend:1666-1708

Legend = orientation:vertical position:bottom columns:3 columnwidth:220 top:45

ScaleMajor = increment:20 start:1469

BarData=

  bar:Nanak text:"Guru Nanak"
  bar:Angad text:"Guru Angad"
  bar:Amar  text:"Guru Amar Das"
  bar:Ram   text:"Guru Ram Das"
  bar:Arjan text:"Guru Arjan"
  bar:Hargobind text:"Guru Hargobind"
  bar:Har text:"Guru Har Rai"
  bar:HarK text:"Guru Har Krishan"
  bar:Tegh text:"Guru Tegh Bahadur"
  bar:Gobind text:"Guru Gobind Singh

PlotData=

  width:10 textcolor:black align:left anchor:from shift:(12,-6)

  bar:Nanak from:1469 till:1539 color:1
  bar:Angad from:1504 till:1552 color:2
  bar:Amar from:1479 till:1574 color:3
  bar:Ram from:1534 till:1581 color:4
  bar:Arjan from:1563 till:1606 color:5
  bar:Hargobind from:1595 till:1644 color:6
  bar:Har from:1630 till:1661 color:7
  bar:HarK from:1656 till:1664 color:8
  bar:Tegh from:1621 till:1675 color:9
  bar:Gobind from:1666 till:1708 color:10
 
 

== History ==
  Dev Ji.]]
 
Guru Nanak (14691539), the founder of Sikhism, was born in the village of Ri Bhi d Talwand, now called Nankana Sahib (in present-day Pakistan).  His parents were Khatri Hindus. As a boy, Nanak was fascinated by God and religion. He would not partake in religious rituals or customs and oddly meditated alone. His desire to explore the mysteries of life eventually led him to leave home and take missionary journeys.

In his early teens, Nanak caught the attention of the local landlord  , there is no Muslim" (in Punjabi, "n ki hind n ki musalmn"). It was from this moment that Nanak would begin to spread the teachings of what was then the beginning of Sikhi.  Although the exact account of his itinerary is disputed, he is widely acknowledged to have made five major journeys, spanning thousands of miles, the first tour being east towards Bengal and Assam, the second south towards Andhra and Tamil Nadu, the third north towards Kashmir, Ladakh, and Tibet, and the fourth tour west towards Baghdad and Mecca.  In his last and final tour, he returned to the banks of the Ravi River to end his days. 

=== Growth of Sikhi === Kartarpur on Khivi and children were living, until he was able to bridge the divide between his followers and the Udasis. Guru Angad continued the work started by Guru Nanak and is widely credited for standardising the Gurmukh script as used in the sacred scripture of the Sikhs.

Guru Amar Das became the third Sikh guru in 1552 at the age of 73. Goindval became an important centre for Sikhi during the guruship of Guru Amar Das. He preached the principle of equality for women by prohibiting purdah and sati (practice)|sati. Guru Amar Das also encouraged the practice of   and made all those who visited him attend lagar before they could speak to him.  In 1567, Emperor Akbar sat with the ordinary and poor people of Punjab to have  . Guru Amar Das also trained 146 apostles of which 52 were women, to manage the rapid expansion of the religion.  Before he died in 1574 aged 95, he appointed his son-in-law  , a Khatri of the Sodhi clan, as the fourth Sikh guru.
 Mughal Emperor, Jahangir  for refusing to make changes to the Granth and for supporting an unsuccessful contender to the throne.

=== Sikh Confederacy and the rise of the Khalsa ===

 
  of the Sikh Kingdom, 1832.]]
  at the Sikh capital, Lahore, Punjab.]]
The tenth guru of Sikhism, Guru Gobind Singh, created the Khalsa in the year 1699, which means "Akal Purakh de fauj"  the Army of God.

The Sikh Khalsas rise to power began in the 17th century during a time of growing militancy against Mughal rule. The creation of a Sikh Empire began when Guru Gobind Singh sent his brave Sikh general, Banda Singh Bahadur along with some hundred Sikhs to fight the Mughal tyrants of India  and those who had committed atrocities against Pir Buddhu Shah.  Banda Singh, with a large group of Sikhs, advanced towards the main Muslim Mughal city of Sirhind and, following the instructions of the guru, punished all the culprits. Soon after the invasion of Sirhind, Guru Gobind Singh was stabbed by a Pathan assassin hired by Mughals, Jamshed Khan stabbed the Guru in the left side below the heart while he was resting in his chamber after the Rehras prayer. Guru Gobind Singh killed the attacker with his sword, while the assassins companion tried to flee but was killed by some Sikhs who had rushed in upon hearing the noise. A European surgeon stitched the Gurus wound. However, the wound re-opened as the Guru tugged at a hard strong bow after a few days, and caused profuse bleeding.
 Wazir Khans Dal Khalsa Maharaja Ranjit Singh capturing Lahore in 1799 and establishing the Sikh Kingdom of Punjab. The new king and the Sikh Misls rose to power in a series of sweeping military and diplomatic victories. Increasing the number of Sikhs and spreading the Empire further. His vast empire comprised almost   of what is now Afghanistan, Pakistan and Northern India.

The empire of the Sikhs was widely feared by many natives including Afghans, Persians and many Asian countries. Even many Pathans who had previously lived there during the Islamic rule, attempted many times to attack the Empire with over 20,000 troops, in which case Maharaja Ranjit Singh sent his bravest Sikh warrior, named Akali Phula Singh Nihang (at the age of 65) and a few hundred Singhs to deal with the invading Pathans and bring them under control.

The Sikhs retained control of the Sikh Empire.  However, another challenge was yet to come. In the East, the British Empire took over thousands of square miles of land, including eastern parts of India and many Asian countries. In 1839, after the death of Maharaja Ranjit Singh, the Empire fell on the shoulders of his son, Maharaja Duleep Singh (at the age of 11) and soon after the British would attack the Sikh Kingdom. The British would also meet their biggest challenge during their Conquest. Both British and Sikh sides lost many troops and heavy number of materials in various battles, such as the Anglo-Sikh wars. The British were claimed to be unbeatable, but Maharaja Ranjit Singh and the Sikhs were the only people who could stand toe to toe with the British forces. For the first time during the British conquest the British were unable to invade and resulted in both sides having to stop and come to terms.
This led to further Anglo-Sikh wars and further loss on both sides. The Empire then gradually fell into the hands of the British.

=== Political advancement === spiritual and temporal reasons (known as mr and pr in Sikhi).  Sikhs grew as an organized community and under the 10th Guru the Sikhs developed a trained fighting force to defend their independence. In 1644, Guru Har Rai became guru followed by Guru Har Krishan, the boy guru, in 1661. Guru Har Krishan helped to heal many sick people. Coming into contact with so many people every day, he too was infected and taken seriously ill and later died. No hymns composed by these three gurus are included in the Guru Granth Sahib. 
 executed by Aurangzeb for helping to protect the faith of Hindus, after a delegation of Kashmiri Pandits came to him for help when the Emperor was killing those who refused to convert to Islam.  He was succeeded by his son, Gobind Rai who was just nine years old at the time of his fathers death. Gobind Rai further militarised his followers, and was baptised by the   when he formed the Khalsa on 30 March 1699. From here on in he was known as Guru Gobind Singh.

From the time of Nanak the Sikhs had significantly transformed. Even though the core Sikh spiritual philosophy was never affected, the followers now began to develop a political identity. Conflict with Mughal authorities escalated during the lifetime of Guru Teg Bahadur and Guru Gobind Singh. The latter founded the Khalsa in 1699. The Khalsa is a disciplined community that combines its spiritual purpose and goals with political and military duties.  After Aurangzeb killed four of his sons, Guru Gobind Singh sent Aurangzeb the Zafarnamah (Notification/Epistle of Victory).

Shortly before his death, Guru Gobind Singh ordered that the Guru Granth Sahib|Gur Granth Shib (the Sikh Holy Scripture), would be the ultimate spiritual authority for the Sikhs and temporal authority would be vested in the Khalsathe Sikh Nation. 

A former ascetic was charged by Guru Gobind Singh with the duty of punishing those who had persecuted the innocents in Punjab. After the Gurus death, Baba Banda Singh Bahadur became the commander-in-chief of the Khalsa and was responsible for several attacks on the Mughal empire. He was executed by the emperor Farukh Siyar after refusing the offer of a pardon if he converted to Islam. 
 Maharaja Ranjit Singh, with its capital in Lahore and limits reaching the Khyber Pass and the borders of China. The order, traditions and discipline developed over centuries culminated at the time of Ranjit Singh to give rise to the common religious and social identity that the term "Sikhi" describes.   
 First and Second Anglo-Sikh Wars. This brought the Punjab under the British Raj. Sikhs formed the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee and the Shiromani Akali Dal to preserve Sikhs religious and political organization a quarter of a century later. With the partition of India in 1947, thousands of Sikhs were killed in violence and millions were forced to leave their ancestral homes in West Punjab.  Sikhs faced initial opposition from the Government in forming a linguistic state that other states in India were afforded. The Akali Dal started a non-violence movement for Sikh and Punjabi rights. Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale emerged as a leader of the Damdami Taksal in 1977 and promoted a more militant solution to the problem. In June 1984, Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi ordered the Indian army to launch Operation Blue Star to remove Bhindranwale and his followers from the Darbar Sahib. Bhindranwale and his accompanying followers, as well as many innocent Sikhs visiting the temple, were killed during the armys operations. In October, Indira Gandhi was assassinated by two of her Sikh bodyguards. The assassination was followed by the 1984 anti-Sikh riots.  and Hindu-Sikh conflicts in Punjab, as a reaction to Operation Blue Star and the assassin.

== Scripture ==

There is one primary source of scripture for the Sikhs: the Gur Granth Shib. The Gur Granth Shib may be referred to as the di Granthliterally, The First Volumeand the two terms are often used synonymously. Here, however, the di Granth refers to the version of the scripture created by Guru Arjan in 1604. The Gur Granth Shib is the final version of the scripture created by Guru Gobind Singh.

There are other sources of scriptures such as the Dasam Granth and so called Janamsakhis. These however, have been the subject of controversial debate amongst the Sikh community.

=== Adi Granth ===
 
The di Granth was compiled primarily by Bhai Gurdas under the supervision of Guru Arjan between the years 1603 and 1604.  It is written in the Gurmukhi|Gurmukh script, which is a descendant of the   script used in the Punjab at that time.  The Gurmukhi|Gurmukh script was standardised by Guru Angad, the second guru of the Sikhs, for use in the Sikh scriptures and is thought to have been influenced by the rad script|rad and Devangar scripts. An authoritative scripture was created to protect the integrity of hymns and teachings of the Sikh gurus and fifteen bhagats. These fifteen bhagats are Namdev, Ravidas, Jaidev, Trilocan, Beni, Ramanand, Sainu, Dhanna, Sadhna, Pipa, Sur, Bhikhan, Paramanand, Farid, and Kabir.  At the time, Arjan Sahib tried to prevent undue influence from the followers of Prithi Chand, the gurus older brother and rival. 

=== Guru Granth Sahib ===
 ]]
 
The final version of the Gur Granth Shib was compiled by Guru Gobind Singh in 1678. It consists of the original di Granth with the addition of Guru Tegh Bahadurs hymns. The Guru Granth Sahib is considered the Eleventh and final spiritual authority of the Sikhs.

:Punjabi language|Punjabi:  
:Transliteration:  
: .

It contains compositions by the first five Gurus, Guru Teg Bahadur and just one   (couplet) from Guru Gobind Singh.  It also contains the traditions and teachings of sants (saints) such as Kabir, Namdev, Ravidas, and Sheikh Farid along with several others. 
 Hindi and used extensively across medieval northern India by proponents of popular devotional religion.    As per the name "Gurmukhi", it is not merely a script but it is the language which came out of Gurus mouth  by using this definition, all words in Guru Granth Sahib constitute "Gurbani" words, thus making Gurmukhi language which then constitute two components  spoken Gurmukhi words (in form of Gurbani which originated from different languages (like worlds different languages have similar roots) and Gurmukhi script. The text further comprises over 5000 shabhad|abads, or hymns, which are poetically constructed and set to classical form of music rendition, can be set to predetermined musical Tala (music)|tl, or rhythmic beats.
 ians at the Golden Temple complex]]

The Granth begins with the Mul Mantra|Ml Mantra, an iconic verse created by Nanak:

: 
:ISO 15919 transliteration:  
:Simplified transliteration:  
: , the ever existing, creator being personified, without fear, without hatred, image Of the timeless being, beyond birth, self existent, by Gurus Grace.

All text within the Granth is known as gurbani|gurbn. And Gurbani is the Guru "Baani Guru Guru hai Baani" (The word is the Guru and Guru is the word) and "Shabd Guru Surat Dhun Chaylaa" (The Shabad is the Guru, upon whom I lovingly focus my consciousness; I am the disciple.). Therefore, as evident from the message of the Guru Nanak (first Guru) Shabad (or word) was always the Guru (the enlightener); however, as Sikhism stand on the dual strands of Miri-Piri, the Guru in Sikhism is a combination of teacher-leader. Therefore, the lineage from Guru Nanak to Guru Gobind Singh was of the teacher-leaders eventually wherein the temporal authority was passed on to the Khalsa and spiritual authority, which always was with, passed to Adi Granth(thence the Guru Granth Sahib).

Therefore, Guru Granth Sahib and its 11th body -the Khalsa is the Guru, teacher-leader, of the Sikhs till eternity.

=== Dasam Granth ===
 
  to the Dasam Granth]] Tenth Guru. Benti Chaupai are part of the daily prayers/lessons (Nitnem) of/for Sikhs.

=== Janamsakhis ===
 

The Janamskhs (literally birth stories), are writings which profess to be biographies of Nanak. Although not scripture in the strictest sense, they provide an interesting look at Nanaks life and the early start of Sikhism. There are severaloften contradictory and sometimes unreliableJanamskhs and they are not held in the same regard as other sources of scriptural knowledge.

== Observances ==
  of a Gurdwara.]] gurdwara (also gurdur, meaning the doorway to God; sometimes transliterated as gurudwara). The