 
 
  root *arg- for "grey" or "shining") and atomic number 47. A soft, white, lustrous transition metal, it possesses the highest electrical conductivity of any element and the highest thermal conductivity of any metal. The metal occurs naturally in its pure, free form (native silver), as an alloy with gold and other metals, and in minerals such as argentite and chlorargyrite. Most silver is produced as a byproduct of copper, gold, lead, and zinc refining.

Silver has long been valued as a precious metal, used in currency coins, to make ornaments, jewelry, high-value tableware and utensils (hence the term Silver (household)|silverware) and as an investment in the forms of coins and bullion. Silver metal is used industrially in electrical contacts and Electrical conductor|conductors, in mirrors and in catalysis of chemical reactions. Its compounds are used in photographic film and dilute silver nitrate solutions and other silver compounds are used as disinfectants and microbiocides (oligodynamic effect). While many medical antimicrobial uses of silver have been supplanted by antibiotics, further research into clinical potential continues.

==Characteristics==
  (~31&nbsp;kg) bullion bar]] malleable (slightly monovalent coinage metal, with a brilliant white metallic luster that can take a high degree of polishing|polish. It has the highest electrical conductivity of all metals, even higher than copper, but its greater cost has prevented it from being widely used in place of copper for electrical purposes. An exception to this is in radio-frequency engineering, particularly at VHF and higher frequencies, where silver plating to improve electrical conductivity of parts, including wires, is widely employed. During World War II in the US, 13,540&nbsp;tons were used in the electromagnets used for enriching uranium, mainly because of the wartime shortage of copper.   
 helium II photosensitive and developed chemically. Silver is stable in pure air and water, but tarnishes when it is exposed to air or water containing ozone or hydrogen sulfide, the latter forming a black layer of silver sulfide which can be cleaned off with dilute hydrochloric acid.  The most common oxidation state of silver is +1 (for example, silver nitrate, AgNO 3 ); the less common +2 compounds (for example, silver(II) fluoride, AgF 2 ), and the even less common +3 (for example, potassium tetrafluoroargentate(III), KAgF 4 ) and even +4 compounds (for example, potassium hexafluoroargentate(IV), K 2 AgF 6 )  are also known.

==Isotopes==
 
Naturally occurring silver is composed of two stable isotopes,  107 Ag and  109 Ag, with  107 Ag being slightly more abundant (51.839% natural abundance). Silvers isotopes are almost equal in abundance, something which is rare in the periodic table. Silvers atomic weight is 107.8682(2) g/Mole (unit)|mol.  
Twenty-eight radioisotopes have been characterized, the most stable being  105 Ag with a half-life of 41.29&nbsp;days,  111 Ag with a half-life of 7.45&nbsp;days, and  112 Ag with a half-life of 3.13&nbsp;hours. This element has numerous meta states, the most stable being  108m Ag (t 1/2  = 418&nbsp;years),  110m Ag (t 1/2  = 249.79&nbsp;days) and  106m Ag (t 1/2  = 8.28&nbsp;days). All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives of less than an hour, and the majority of these have half-lives of less than three minutes.
 relative atomic mass from 93.943 ( 94 Ag) to 126.936 ( 127 Ag);  the primary decay mode before the most abundant stable isotope,  107 Ag, is electron capture and the primary mode after is beta decay. The primary decay products before  107 Ag are palladium (element 46) isotopes, and the primary products after are cadmium (element 48) isotopes.
 Santa Clara accretion of the solar system must reflect the presence of unstable nuclides in the early solar system. 

==Compounds== silver soldering or annealing (metallurgy)|annealing. Silver reacts readily with sulfur or hydrogen sulfide   to produce silver sulfide, a dark-colored compound familiar as the tarnish on silver coins and other objects. Silver sulfide   also forms silver whiskers when silver electrical contacts are used in an atmosphere rich in hydrogen sulfide.
:4 Ag + O 2  + 2 H 2 S → 2 Ag 2 S + 2 H 2 O
  equipped with a silver iodide generator for cloud seeding]]
 seed clouds analytical methods.

Silver oxide ( ), produced when silver nitrate solutions are treated with a base, is used as a positive electrode (anode) in watch Battery (electricity)|batteries. Silver carbonate ( ) is precipitated when silver nitrate is treated with sodium carbonate ( ). 
:2 AgNO 3  + 2 OH −  → Ag 2 O + H 2 O + 2 NO 3  − 
:2 AgNO 3  + Na 2 CO 3  → Ag 2 CO 3  + 2 NaNO 3 
Silver fulminate ( ), a powerful, touch-sensitive explosive used in percussion caps, is made by reaction of silver metal with nitric acid in the presence of ethanol ( ). Other dangerously explosive silver compounds are silver azide ( ), formed by reaction of silver nitrate with sodium azide ( ),  and silver acetylide, formed when silver reacts with acetylene gas.

Latent images formed in silver halide crystals are developed by treatment with alkaline solutions of reducing agents such as hydroquinone, metol (4-(methylamino)phenol sulfate) or ascorbate, which reduce the exposed halide to silver metal. Alkaline solutions of silver nitrate can be reduced to silver metal by reducing sugars such as glucose, and this reaction is used to silver glass mirrors and the interior of glass Christmas ornaments. Silver halides are soluble in solutions of sodium thiosulfate ( ) which is used as a photographic fixer, to remove excess silver halide from photographic emulsions after image development.   

Silver metal is attacked by strong oxidizers such as potassium permanganate ( ) and potassium dichromate ( ), and in the presence of potassium bromide ( ); these compounds are used in photography to bleach silver images, converting them to silver halides that can either be fixed with thiosulfate or redeveloped to intensify the original image. Silver forms cyanide complexes (silver cyanide) that are soluble in water in the presence of an excess of cyanide ions. Silver cyanide solutions are used in electroplating of silver. 

==Applications== stained glass, and more complex decorative colour reactions can be produced by incorporating silver metal in blown, kilnformed or torchworked glass. 

===Currency===
  ISO currency Tower weight of sterling silver; other historical currencies, such as the French livre, have similar etymologies. During the 19th century, the bimetallism that prevailed in most countries was undermined by the discovery of large deposits of silver in the Americas; fearing a sharp decrease in the value of silver and thus the currency, most states switched to a gold standard by 1900. In some languages, such as Spanish and Hebrew, the same word means both silver and money.

The 20th century saw a gradual movement to fiat currency, with most of the world monetary system losing its link to precious metals after Richard Nixon took the United States dollar off the gold standard in 1971; the last currency backed by gold was the Swiss franc, which became a pure fiat currency on 1 May 2000. During this same period, silver gradually ceased to be used in circulating coins. In 1964, the United States stopped minting their silver dime and quarter. They minted their last circulating silver coin in 1970 in its 40% half-dollar.   

In 1968, Canada minted their last circulating silver coins which were the 50% dime and the 50% quarter. The Royal Canadian Mint still makes many collectible silver coins with various dollar denominations. 

Silver is used as a currency by many individuals, and is legal tender in the US state of Utah.  Silver coins and bullion are also used as an investment to guard against inflation and devaluation.

===Jewelry and silverware===
 ). The deeper depressions reperesent lotus buds, an Egyptian motif. Walters Art Museum collections.]]
  from the Hildesheim Treasure, 1st century BC]]
  Argentium Sterling silver is formed, with improved properties, including resistance to firescale.

Sterling silver jew