 
 
 
  
 
 medium for television transmission.

The etymology of the word has a mixed Latin and Greek origin, meaning "far sight": Greek tele ( }}), far, and Latin visio, sight (from video, vis- to see, or to view in the first person).
 Commercially available DVDs and now Blu-ray Discs, have resulted in the television set frequently being used for viewing recorded as well as broadcast material. In recent years, Internet television has seen the rise of television available via the Internet through services such as iPlayer and Hulu.
 broadcast the television signal to individual TV receivers.
 MHz band frequency band.  Signals are now often transmitted with stereo or surround sound in many countries. Until the 2000s broadcast TV programs were generally transmitted as an analog television signal, but during the decade several countries went almost exclusively digital.
 receiving and tuner is properly called a video monitor, rather than a television. A television system may use different technical standards such as digital television (DTV) and high-definition television (HDTV). Television systems are also used for surveillance, industrial process control, and guiding of weapons, in places where direct observation is difficult or dangerous. Some studies have found a link between infancy exposure to television and ADHD. 
 

==History==
 
 electronic technologies to capture, transmit and display a visual image. By the late 1920s, however, those employing only optical and electronic technologies were being explored. All modern television systems relied on the latter, although the knowledge gained from the work on electromechanical systems was crucial in the development of fully electronic television.

  television receiver, Germany, 1958]]
 fax machines, including the pantelegraph, developed in the late nineteenth century. The concept of electrically powered transmission of television images in motion was first sketched in 1878 as the telephonoscope, shortly after the invention of the telephone. At the time, it was imagined by early science fiction authors, that someday that light could be transmitted over copper wires, as sounds were.
 scanning to transmit images was put to actual practical use in 1881 in the pantelegraph, through the use of a pendulum-based scanning mechanism. From this period forward, scanning in one form or another has been used in nearly every image transmission technology to date, including television. This is the concept of "rasterization", the process of converting a visual image into a stream of electrical pulses.
 scanning disk, angular intervals such that in a single rotation the disk would allow light to pass through each hole and onto a light-sensitive selenium sensor which produced the electrical pulses. As an image was focused on the rotating disk, each hole captured a horizontal "slice" of the whole image. 
 tube technology became available. Later designs would use a rotating mirror-drum scanner to capture the image and a cathode ray tube (CRT) as a display device, but moving images were still not possible, due to the poor sensitivity of the selenium sensors. In 1907 Russian scientist Boris Rosing became the first inventor to use a CRT in the receiver of an experimental television system. He used mirror-drum scanning to transmit simple geometric shapes to the CRT.   
  demonstrates electronic television (1929).]] monochromatic images in 1926. Bairds scanning disk produced an image of 30 lines resolution, just enough to discern a human face, from a double spiral of Photographic lenses. R. W. Burns, John Logie Baird: television pioneer, IET, 2000
ISBN 0-85296-797-7 pp. 73, 88  This demonstration by Baird is generally agreed to be the worlds first true demonstration of television, albeit a mechanical form of television no longer in use. Remarkably, in 1927 Baird also invented the worlds first   down to the audio range, he was able to capture the signal on a 10-inch wax audio disc using conventional audio recording technology. A handful of Bairds Phonovision recordings survive and these were finally decoded and rendered into viewable images in the 1990s using modern digital signal-processing technology. 

In 1926, Hungarian engineer Kálmán Tihanyi designed a television system utilizing fully electronic scanning and display elements, and employing the principle of "charge storage" within the scanning (or "camera") tube.  United States Patent Office, Patent No. 2,133,123, 11 Oct 1938.  United States Patent Office, Patent No. 2,158,259, 16 May 1939  

On 25 December 1926, Kenjiro Takayanagi demonstrated a television system with a 40-line resolution that employed a CRT display at Hamamatsu Industrial High School in Japan.  This was the first working example of a fully electronic television receiver. Takayanagi did not apply for a patent. 

By 1927, Russian inventor Léon Theremin developed a mirror-drum-based television system which used interlacing to achieve an image resolution of 100 lines. 

 
In 1927, Philo Farnsworth made the worlds first working television system with electronic scanning of both the pickup and display devices,  , The Virtual Museum of the City of San Francisco  which he first demonstrated to the press on 1 September 1928.  Farnsworth, Elma G., Distant Vision: Romance and Discovery on an Invisible Frontier, Salt Lake City, PemberlyKent, 1989, p. 108. 

WRGB claims to be the worlds oldest television station, tracing its roots to an experimental station founded on 13 January 1928, broadcasting from the General Electric factory in Schenectady, NY, under the call letters W2XB.  It was popularly known as "WGY Television" after its sister radio station. Later in 1928, General Electric started a second facility, this one in New York City, which had the call letters W2XBS, and which today is known as WNBC. The two stations were experimental in nature and had no regular programming, as receivers were operated by engineers within the company. The image of a Felix the Cat doll, rotating on a turntable, was broadcast for 2 hours every day for several years, as new technology was being tested by the engineers.

At the Berlin Radio Show in August 1931, Manfred von Ardenne gave the worlds first public demonstration of a television system using a cathode ray tube for both transmission and reception. The worlds first electronically scanned television service then started in Berlin in 1935. In August 1936 the Olympic Games in Berlin were carried by cable to television stations in Berlin and Leipzig where the public could view the games live. 
 Fernseh A.G. and the United States firm Farnsworth Television owned by Philo Farnsworth signed an agreement to exchange their television patents and technology to speed development of television transmitters and stations in their respective countries. 

On 2 November 1936 the BBC began transmitting the worlds first public regular high-definition service from the Victorian Alexandra Palace in north London.  It therefore claims to be the birthplace of television broadcasting as we know it today.

In 1936, Kálmán Tihanyi described the principle of plasma display, the first flat panel display system.  

Mexican inventor Guillermo González Camarena also played an important role in early television. His experiments with television (known as telectroescopía at first) began in 1931 and led to a patent for the "trichromatic field sequential system" color television in 1940,. 

Although television became more familiar in the United States with the general public at the  . Diggs-Brown, Barbara (2011)   p.48 

Amateur television (ham TV or ATV) was developed for non-commercial experimentation, pleasure and public service events by amateur radio operators. Ham TV stations were on the air in many cities before commercial TV stations came on the air. 

In 2012, it was reported that television revenue was growing faster than film for major media companies.   

==Geographical usage==
 Television introduction by country
{|
|-
|   ||  
|-
|   ||  
|-
|   ||  
|-
|   ||  
|}
]]
 
*Timeline of the introduction of television in countries

==Content==

===Programming===
 
Getting TV programm