
United States
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Usa)

This article is about the United States of America. For other uses of terms redirecting here, see US (disambiguation), USA (disambiguation), and United States (disambiguation).
United States of America
	
Flag	Great Seal
Motto: 
"In God we trust" (official)[1][2]
"E pluribus unum" (Latin) (traditional)[3]
"Out of many, one"
Anthem: "The Star-Spangled Banner"

Capital	Washington, D.C.
38°53′N 77°01′W
Largest city	New York City
40°40′N 73°56′W
Official languages	None at federal level[a]
National language	English[b]
Demonym	American
Government	Federal presidential constitutional republic
 - 	President	Barack Obama (D)
 - 	Vice President	Joe Biden (D)
 - 	Speaker of the House	John Boehner (R)
 - 	Chief Justice	John Roberts
Legislature	Congress
 - 	Upper house	Senate
 - 	Lower house	House of Representatives
Independence from the Kingdom of Great Britain
 - 	Declared	July 4, 1776 
 - 	Recognized	September 3, 1783 
 - 	Current constitution	June 21, 1788 
Area
 - 	Total	9,826,675 km2[4][c] (3rd/4th)
3,794,101 sq mi 
 - 	Water (%)	6.76
Population
 - 	2013 estimate	315,919,000[5] (3rd)
 - 	Density	34.2/km2
88.6/sq mi
GDP (PPP)	2012 estimate
 - 	Total	$15.685 trillion[6] (1st)
 - 	Per capita	$49,922[6] (6th)
GDP (nominal)	2012 estimate
 - 	Total	$15.685 trillion[6] (1st)
 - 	Per capita	$49,922[6] (12th)
Gini (2011)	47.7[7]
high · 39th (2009)
HDI (2013)	 0.937[8]
very high · 3rd
Currency	United States dollar ($) (USD)
Time zone	(UTC−5 to −10)
 - 	Summer (DST)	 (UTC−4 to −10[e])
Drives on the	right
Calling code	+1
ISO 3166 code	US
Internet TLD	.us   .gov   .mil   .edu
a.	^ English is the official language of at least 28 states; some sources give higher figures, based on differing definitions of "official".[9] English and Hawaiian are both official languages in the state of Hawaii.
b.	^ English is the de facto language of American government and the sole language spoken at home by 80 percent of Americans aged five and older. Spanish is the second most commonly spoken language.
c.	^ Whether the United States or China is larger is disputed. The figure given is from the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency's The World Factbook. Other sources give smaller figures. All authoritative calculations of the country's size include only the 50 states and the District of Columbia, not the territories.
d.	^ The population estimate is of people whose usual residence is within the 50 states and the District of Columbia, regardless of nationality. It does not include those living in the territories (over 4 million people, mostly in Puerto Rico).
e.	^ See Time in the United States for details about laws governing time zones in the United States.
f.	^ Does not include insular areas and United States Minor Outlying Islands, which have their own ISO 3166 codes.
The United States of America (USA or U.S.A.), commonly called the United States (US or U.S.) and America, is a federal republic[10][11] consisting of fifty states and a federal district. The 48 contiguous states and the federal district of Washington, D.C. are in central North America between Canada and Mexico. The state of Alaska is west of Canada and east of Russia across the Bering Strait, and the state of Hawaii is in the mid-North Pacific. The country also has five populated and nine unpopulated territories in the Pacific and the Caribbean.
At 3.79 million square miles (9.83 million km2) and with around 315 million people, the United States is the third-or fourth-largest country by total area and the third-largest by both land area and population. It is one of the world's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations, the product of large-scale immigration from many countries.[12] The geography and climate of the U.S. is also extremely diverse, with deserts, plains, forests, and mountains that are home to a wide variety of species.
Paleo-indians migrated from Asia to what is now the United States mainland around 15,000 years ago. After 1500, Old World diseases introduced by Europeans greatly reduced their populations. European colonization began in the late 15th century and came mostly from England. The United States emerged from thirteen British colonies located along the Atlantic seaboard. Disputes between Great Britain and the American colonies led to the American Revolution. On July 4, 1776, delegates from the thirteen colonies unanimously issued the Declaration of Independence, which established the United States of America. The American Revolutionary War, which ended with the recognition of independence of the United States from the Kingdom of Great Britain, was the first successful war of independence against a European colonial empire.[13][14] The current Constitution was adopted on September 17, 1787; 27 Amendments have since been added to the Constitution. The first ten amendments, collectively named the Bill of Rights, were ratified in 1791 and guarantee many fundamental civil rights and freedoms.
Driven by the doctrine of manifest destiny, the United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the nineteenth century.[15] This involved displacing native tribes, acquiring new territories, and gradually admitting new states.[15] The American Civil War ended legalized slavery in the United States.[16] By the end of the nineteenth century, the United States extended into the Pacific Ocean,[17] and its economy was the world's largest.[18] The Spanish–American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower, the first country with nuclear weapons, and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union left the United States as the sole superpower.
The United States is a developed country and has the world's largest national economy, with an estimated 2012 GDP of $15.6 trillion – 19% of global GDP at purchasing-power parity, as of 2011.[6][19][20] The per capita GDP of the U.S. was the world's sixth-highest as of 2010,[6] although America's income inequality was also ranked highest among OECD countries by the World Bank.[21] The economy is fueled by an abundance of natural resources, a well-developed infrastructure,[22] and high productivity;[23] and while its economy is considered post-industrial it continues to be one of the world's largest manufacturers.[24] The country accounts for 39% of global military spending,[25] and is a leading economic, political, and cultural force in the world, as well as a leader in scientific research and technological innovation.[26][27]
Contents
1 Etymology
2 History
2.1 Native American and European settlement
2.2 Independence and expansion
2.3 Slavery, civil war and industrialization
2.4 World War I, Great Depression, and World War II
2.5 Cold War and Civil Rights era
2.6 Contemporary era
3 Geography
4 Demographics
4.1 Population
4.2 Language
4.3 Religion
4.4 Family structure
5 Government and politics
5.1 Political divisions
5.2 Parties and elections
5.3 Foreign relations
5.4 Government finance
5.4.1 Public debt
6 Military
7 Law enforcement
8 Economy
8.1 Income, poverty, and wealth
9 Infrastructure
9.1 Transportation
9.2 Energy
10 Science and technology
11 Education
12 Health
13 Culture
13.1 Popular media
13.2 Literature, philosophy, and the arts
13.3 Food
13.4 Sports
14 See also
15 References
16 External links
Etymology

See also: Names for United States citizens
In 1507, German cartographer Martin Waldseemüller produced a world map on which he named the lands of the Western Hemisphere "America" after Italian explorer and cartographer Amerigo Vespucci.[28]
The first documentary evidence of the phrase "United States of America" was in an anonymously written essay published in The Virginia Gazette newspaper in Williamsburg, Virginia on April 6, 1776.[29][30] In June 1776, Thomas Jefferson included the phrase "UNITED STATES OF AMERICA" in all capitalized letters in the headline of his "original Rough draught" of the Declaration of Independence.[31][32] In the final Fourth of July version of the Declaration, the pertinent section of the title was changed to read, "The unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of America".[33]
In 1777 the Articles of Confederation announced, "The Stile of this Confederacy shall be 'The United States of America'".[34]
The short form "United States" is also standard. Other common forms include the "U.S.", the "USA", and "America". Colloquial names include the "U.S. of A." and, internationally, the "States". "Columbia", a name popular in poetry and songs of the late 1700s,[35] derives its origin from Christopher Columbus; it appears in the name "District of Columbia".
The standard way to refer to a citizen of the United States is as an "American". "United States", "American" and "U.S." are used to refer to the country adjectivally ("American values", "U.S. forces"). "American" is rarely used in English to refer to subjects not connected with the United States.[36]
The phrase "United States" was originally treated as plural, a description of a collection of independent states—e.g., "the United States are"—including in the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, ratified in 1865. It became common to treat it as singular, a single unit—e.g., "the United States is"—after the end of the Civil War. The singular form is now standard; the plural form is retained in the idiom "these United States".[37] The difference has been described as more significant than one of usage, but reflecting the difference between a collection of states and a unit.[38]
In non-English languages, the name is frequently translated as the translation of either the "United States" or "United States of America", and colloquially as "America". In addition, an initialism is sometimes used.[39]
History

Main article: History of the United States
Native American and European settlement
People from Asia migrated to the North American continent beginning between 40,000 and 12,000 years ago.[40] Some, such as the pre-Columbian Mississippian culture, developed advanced agriculture, grand architecture, and state-level societies. After European explorers and traders made the first contacts, it is estimated that their population declined due to various reasons, including diseases such as smallpox and measles,[41] intermarriage,[42] genocide and warfare with European explorers and colonists,[43] as well as between the indigenous peoples.[44] During the 1620's Puritan and Wampanoag culture initially were peaceful, however, by the late 1660's differences in religion, monogomy, and discrepencies in land usage led to open hostilities. [45] Metacomet, known was King Philip, was a Wampanoag war chief who attacked Puritan colonists in a series of costly campaigns. The Puritans successfully retaliated strongly against the Indians, having incorporated other Indian tribes into their war campaigns. Starting in 1675, during King Philip's War, 4,000 Indians died from disease, battle, and exposure. [46]As many as 2,000 Indians were forced to leave New England and about 1,000 Indians were sold into slavery by the Puritans. [46] English colonist casualties were high, as 600 Euroamericans lost their lives and one tenth of New England males died in battle.[46] By the war's end, the Euroamerican colonists had resoundingly defeated the Indians and were able to expand and control New England.[47]
		
New England's Mayflower Compact placed London ex-cons and Separatist men on an equal footing in the new land 1620.
Culture-clash. Native American gift-giving obligated the giver, for Europeans, the receiver.
The first Spanish explorers landed in "La Florida" in 1513. Spain set up settlements in California, Florida, and New Mexico that were eventually merged into the United States. There were also some French settlements along the Mississippi River.
James I on April 10, 1606 chartered The Virginia Company with the purpose of establishing English settlements on the eastern coast of North America. The Virginia Colony was planted in 1607 with Jamestown and the Pilgrims' Plymouth Colony in 1620.
Some 100,000 Puritans later settled New England, especially the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Beginning in 1614, the Dutch settled in present day New York State; their colony of New Netherland, which had earlier conquered New Sweden, was taken over by England in 1674, but a strong Dutch influence persisted in the Hudson Valley north of New York City for generations. Many new settlers, especially to the South, were indentured servants—some two-thirds of all Virginia settlers between 1630 and 1680.[48] By the turn of the 18th century, African slaves were becoming the primary source of bonded labor in many regions.[49]
With the 1729 division of the Carolinas and the 1732 colonization of Georgia, the thirteen British colonies that would become the United States of America were established.[50] All had local governments with elections open to most free men, with a growing devotion to the ancient rights of Englishmen and a sense of self-government stimulating support for republicanism. All legalized the African slave trade.[51] With high birth rates, low death rates, and steady settlement, the colonial population grew rapidly. The Christian revivalist movement of the 1730s and 1740s known as the Great Awakening fueled interest in both religion and religious liberty.
In the French and Indian War, British forces seized Canada from the French, but the francophone population remained politically isolated from the southern colonies. Excluding the Native Americans, who were being conquered and displaced, those thirteen colonies had a population of 2.6 million in 1770, about one-third that of Britain. Nearly one-fifth of those living in what would become the United States were black slaves.[52]
English expansion westward saw incorporation of disparate pre-established cultures it met. But it also found Amerindian resistance to that settlement. Their opposition took various forms across the continent, as allies with Europeans, multi-tribe nations, and alone—by relocation and warring, by treaties and in court. On the other hand, the colonists of British North America were subject to British taxation, they had no representation in the Parliament of Great Britain.
Independence and expansion
The American Revolution was the first successful colonial war of independence against a European power. Americans had developed a democratic system of local government and an ideology of "republicanism" that held government rested on the will of the people (not the king), which strongly opposed corruption and demanded civic virtue. They demanded their rights as Englishmen and rejected British efforts to impose taxes without the approval of colonial legislatures. The British insisted and the conflict escalated to full-scale war in 1775, the American Revolutionary War.[53] On June 14, 1775, the Continental Congress, convening in Philadelphia, established a Continental Army under the command of George Washington.[54] Proclaiming that "all men are created equal" and endowed with "certain unalienable Rights", the Congress adopted the Declaration of Independence, drafted largely by Thomas Jefferson, on July 4, 1776. That date is now celebrated annually as America's Independence Day. In 1777, the Articles of Confederation established a weak government that operated until 1789.[55]
		
Declaration of Independence, by John Trumbull, picturing the Committee of Five presenting their draft to the Second Continental Congress in 1776.
States that did not originally belong to the Union were initially organized as territories. Citizens were encouraged to settle there, and after sufficient time, the territories were admitted into the Union as full and equal states.
After a naval victory followed by the British defeat at Yorktown by American forces assisted by the French,[56] the United States was independent. In the peace treaty of 1783 Britain recognized American sovereignty over most territory east of the Mississippi River. Nationalists calling for a much stronger federal government with powers of taxation led the constitutional convention in 1787. After intense debate in state conventions the United States Constitution was ratified in 1788. The first Senate, House of Representatives, and president—George Washington—took office in 1789. The Bill of Rights, forbidding federal restriction of personal freedoms and guaranteeing a range of legal protections, was adopted in 1791.[57]
Attitudes toward slavery were shifting; nearly all states officially outlawed the international slave trade before the federal government criminalized it in 1808.[58] All the Northern states abolished slavery between 1780 and 1804, leaving the slave states of the South as defenders of the "peculiar institution". With cotton a highly profitable plantation crop after 1820, Southern whites increasingly decided slavery was a positive good for everyone, including the slaves.[59] The Second Great Awakening, beginning about 1800, converted millions to evangelical Protestantism. In the North it energized multiple social reform movements, including abolitionism.[60]
Americans' eagerness to expand westward prompted a long series of Indian Wars.[61] The Louisiana Purchase of French-claimed territory under President Thomas Jefferson in 1803 almost doubled the nation's size.[62] The War of 1812, declared against Britain over various grievances and fought to a draw, strengthened U.S. nationalism.[63] A series of U.S. military incursions into Florida led Spain to cede it and other Gulf Coast territory in 1819.[64]
President Andrew Jackson took office in 1829, and began a set of reforms which led to the era of Jacksonian democracy, which is considered to have lasted from 1830 to 1850. This included many reforms, such as wider male suffrage, and various adjustments to the power of the Federal government. This also led to the rise of the Second Party System, which refers to the dominant parties which existed from 1828 to 1854.
The Trail of Tears in the 1830s exemplified the Indian removal policy that moved Indians to their own reservations with annual government subsidies. The United States annexed the Republic of Texas in 1845, amid a period when the concept of Manifest Destiny was becoming popular.[65] The 1846 Oregon Treaty with Britain led to U.S. control of the present-day American Northwest.[66] The U.S. victory in the Mexican-American War resulted in the 1848 secession of California and much of the present-day American Southwest.[67]
The California Gold Rush of 1848–49 further spurred western migration.[68] New railways made relocation easier for settlers and increased conflicts with Native Americans.[69] Over a half-century, up to 40 million American bison, or buffalo, were slaughtered for skins and meat and to ease the railways' spread.[70] The loss of the buffalo, a primary resource for the plains Indians, was an existential blow to many native cultures.[70] In 1869, President Ulysses S. Grant's Peace policy reversed the previous costly policy of "wars of extermination" in order to civilize and give Indians eventual United State citizenship having incorporated Indians as wards of the state, led by a philanthropic Board of Indian Commissioners. [71]
Slavery, civil war and industrialization
Tensions between slave and free states mounted with arguments about the relationship between the state and federal governments, as well as violent conflicts over the spread of slavery into new states.[72] Abraham Lincoln, candidate of the largely antislavery Republican Party, was elected president in 1860.[73] Before he took office, seven slave states declared their secession—which the federal government maintained was illegal—and formed the Confederate States of America.[74]
		
Battle of Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. The Civil War cemented the Union and spurred the steel industry and intercontinental railroad construction.
Ellis Island, New York City. East Coast immigrants worked in factories, railroads, and mines, and created demand for industrialized agriculture.
With the Confederate attack upon Fort Sumter, the Civil War began and four more slave states joined the Confederacy.[74] Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation in 1863 declared slaves in the Confederacy to be free. Following the Union victory in 1865, three amendments to the U.S. Constitution ensured freedom for the nearly four million African Americans who had been slaves,[75] made them citizens, and gave them voting rights. The war and its resolution led to a substantial increase in federal power.[76] The war remains the deadliest conflict in American history, resulting in the deaths of 620,000 soldiers.[77]
After the war, the assassination of Abraham Lincoln radicalized Republican Reconstruction policies aimed at reintegrating and rebuilding the Southern states while ensuring the rights of the newly freed slaves.[78] President Ulysses S. Grant implemented the Department of Justice and used the U.S. Military to enforce suffrage and civil rights for African Americans in the South destroying the Ku Klux Klan in 1871 under the Force Acts.[79] The resolution of the disputed 1876 presidential election by the Compromise of 1877 ended Reconstruction; Jim Crow laws soon disenfranchised many African Americans.[78]
In the North, urbanization and an unprecedented influx of immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe hastened the country's industrialization. The wave of immigration, lasting until 1924, provided labor and transformed American culture.[80] United States immigration policies were Eurocentric, which barred Asians from naturalization, and restricted their immigration beginning with the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882.[81] National infrastructure development spurred economic growth. The end of the Civil War spurred greater settlement and development of the American Old West. This was due to a variety of social and technological developments, including the completion of the First Transcontinental Telegraph in 1861 and the First Transcontinental Railroad in 1869.
The 1867 Alaska Purchase from Russia completed the country's mainland expansion. The Wounded Knee Massacre in 1890 was the last major armed conflict of the Indian Wars. In 1893, the indigenous monarchy of the Pacific Kingdom of Hawaii was overthrown in a coup led by American residents; the United States annexed the archipelago in 1898. Victory in the Spanish–American War the same year demonstrated that the United States was a world power and led to the annexation of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines.[82] The Philippines gained independence a half-century later; Puerto Rico and Guam remain U.S. territories.
The emergence of many prominent industrialists at the end of the 19th century gave rise to the Gilded Age, a period of growing affluence and power among the business class. This period eventually ended with the beginning of the Progressive Era, a period of great reforms in many societal areas, including regulatory protection for the public, greater antitrust measures, and attention to living conditions for the working classes. President Theodore Roosevelt was one leading proponent of progressive reforms.
World War I, Great Depression, and World War II
At the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the United States remained neutral. Most Americans sympathized with the British and French, although many opposed intervention.[83] In 1917, the United States joined the Allies, and the American Expeditionary Forces helped to turn the tide against the Central Powers. President Woodrow Wilson took a leading diplomatic role at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 which helped to shape the post-war world. Wilson advocated strongly for the U.S. to join the League of Nations. However, the Senate refused to approve this, and did not ratify the Treaty of Versailles, which established the League of Nations.[84]
		
The Dust Bowl brought agricultural depression, impacted industrial markets, and led to large relocation out of the Great Plains.
WWII invasion of Europe required war industry, accelerating migration to big cities and large scale manufacturing
The country pursued a policy of unilateralism, verging on isolationism.[84] In 1920, the women's rights movement won passage of a constitutional amendment granting women's suffrage. The prosperity of the Roaring Twenties ended with the Wall Street Crash of 1929 that triggered the Great Depression.
After his election as president in 1932, Franklin D. Roosevelt responded with the New Deal, a range of policies increasing government intervention in the economy, including the establishment of the Social Security system.[85] The Dust Bowl of the mid-1930s impoverished many farming communities and spurred a new wave of western migration.
The United States, effectively neutral during World War II's early stages after Nazi Germany's invasion of Poland in September 1939, began supplying material to the Allies in March 1941 through the Lend-Lease program. On December 7, 1941, the Empire of Japan launched a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, prompting the United States to join the Allies against the Axis powers as well as the internment of Japanese Americans by the thousands.[86] Participation in the war spurred capital investment and industrial capacity. Among the major combatants, the United States was the only nation to become richer because of the war.[87]
Allied conferences at Bretton Woods and Yalta outlined a new system of international organizations that placed the United States and Soviet Union at the center of world affairs. As victory was won in Europe, a 1945 international conference held in San Francisco produced the United Nations Charter, which became active after the war.[88] The United States, having developed the first nuclear weapons, used them on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August. Japan surrendered on September 2, ending the war.[89]
Cold War and Civil Rights era

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2013)
		
Civil Rights leaders, including Ralph Abernathy and Martin Luther King, Jr., lead one of the Selma to Montgomery marches
A vehicle enters West Berlin through the Western Allies' Checkpoint Charlie after the fall of the Berlin Wall, marking the beginning of the end of the Cold War
The United States and the Soviet Union jockeyed for power after World War II during the Cold War, dominating the military affairs of Europe through NATO and the Warsaw Pact, respectively. While they engaged in proxy wars and developed powerful nuclear arsenals, the two countries avoided direct military conflict. The U.S. often opposed Third World left-wing movements that it viewed as Soviet-sponsored. American troops fought Communist Chinese and North Korean forces in the Korean War of 1950–53. The House Un-American Activities Committee pursued a series of investigations into suspected leftist subversion, while Senator Joseph McCarthy became the figurehead of anticommunist sentiment.[90]
The 1961 Soviet launch of the first manned spaceflight prompted President John F. Kennedy's call for the United States to be first to land "a man on the moon", achieved in 1969.[91] Kennedy also faced a tense nuclear showdown with Soviet forces in Cuba.[92] Meanwhile, the United States experienced sustained economic expansion. Amidst the presence of various white nationalist groups, particularly the Ku Klux Klan, a growing civil rights movement used nonviolence to confront segregation and discrimination. This was symbolized and led by black Americans such as Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King, Jr. On the other hand, some black nationalist groups such as the Black Panther Party had a more militant scope.
Following Kennedy's assassination in 1963, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Voting Rights Act of 1965, and Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 were passed under President Lyndon B. Johnson.[93] He also signed into law the Medicare and Medicaid programs.[94] Johnson also expanded a proxy war in Southeast Asia into the unsuccessful Vietnam War. A widespread countercultural movement grew, fueled by opposition to the war, black nationalism, and the sexual revolution. Betty Friedan, Gloria Steinem, and others led a new wave of feminism that sought political, social, and economic equality for women.
As president, Richard Nixon ended U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, improved relations with China, and oversaw the beginning of a period of détente with the Soviet Union. As a result of the Watergate scandal, in 1974 Nixon became the first U.S. president to resign, to avoid being impeached on charges including obstruction of justice and abuse of power. The Jimmy Carter administration of the late 1970s was marked by stagflation and the Iran hostage crisis. The election of Ronald Reagan as president in 1980 heralded a rightward shift in American politics,[95] reflected in major changes in taxation and spending priorities.[96] His second term in office brought both the Iran–Contra scandal and significant diplomatic progress with the Soviet Union.[97] The subsequent Soviet collapse ended the Cold War.[98]
Contemporary era


September 11, 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City.
Under President George H. W. Bush, the United States took a lead role in the UN–sanctioned Gulf War.[99] The longest economic expansion in modern U.S. history—from March 1991 to March 2001—encompassed the Bill Clinton administration and the dot-com bubble.[100] A civil lawsuit and sex scandal led to Clinton's impeachment in 1998, but he remained in office.[101]
The 2000 presidential election, one of the closest in American history, was resolved by a U.S. Supreme Court decision—George W. Bush, son of George H. W. Bush, became president.[102] On September 11, 2001, al-Qaeda terrorists struck the World Trade Center in New York City and The Pentagon near Washington, D.C., killing nearly three thousand people.[103] In response, the Bush administration launched the global War on Terror, invading Afghanistan and removing the Taliban government and al-Qaeda training camps.[104] Taliban insurgents continue to fight a guerrilla war.[105] In 2003, the United States and several allied forces invaded Iraq to engineer regime change there.[106][107] In 2005, Hurricane Katrina caused severe destruction along much of the Gulf Coast, devastating New Orleans.[108]
In 2008, amid a global economic recession, the first African American president, Barack Obama, was elected.[109] Major health care and financial system reforms were enacted two years later.[110] In 2011, a raid by Navy SEALs in Pakistan killed al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden.[111] The Iraq War officially ended with the pullout of the remaining U.S. troops from the country in December 2011.[112]
Geography

Main articles: Geography of the United States, Climate of the United States, and Environment of the United States


Composite satellite image of the contiguous United States
The land area of the contiguous United States is 2,959,064 square miles (7,663,941